Group Testing:
An Information Theory Perspective
Second Edition
Matthew Aldridge 1, Oliver Johnson 2, and Jonathan Scarlett 3
1University of Leeds,m.aldridge@leeds.ac.uk
2University of Bristol,O.Johnson@bristol.ac.uk
3National University of Singapore,scarlett@comp.nus.edu.sg
May 15, 2026
arXiv:1902.06002v4  [cs.IT]  14 May 2026
Contents
Preface to the second edition 2
Acknowledgments 3
Notation 4
1 Introduction to Group Testing 6
1.1 What is group testing? . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 6
1.2 About this survey . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 8
1.3 Basic definitions and notation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 10
1.4 Counting bound and rate . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 14
1.5 A brief review of noiseless adaptive group testing . . . . . . . . . 18
1.6 A brief review of zero-error nonadaptive group testing . . . . . . 20
1.7 Applications of group testing . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 23
Appendix: Comparison of combinatorial and i.i.d. priors . . . . . . . . 29
2 Algorithms for Noiseless Group Testing 34
2.1 Summary of algorithms . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 34
2.2 SSS: Smallest satisfying set . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 37
2.3 COMP: Combinatorial orthogonal matching pursuit . . . . . . . 41
2.4 DD: Definite defectives . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 44
2.5 SCOMP: Sequential COMP . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 48
2.6 Linear programming relaxations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 49
2.7 Improved rates with near-constant tests-per-item . . . . . . . . . 51
3 Algorithms for Noisy Group Testing 55
3.1 Noisy channel models . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 55
3.2 Noisy linear programming relaxations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 60
3.3 Belief propagation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 61
3.4 Noisy COMP . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 64
3.5 Separate decoding of items . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 66
3.6 Noisy (near-)definite defectives . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 69
3.7 Improved rates with constant tests-per-item . . . . . . . . . . . . 70
3.8 Rate comparisons and numerical simulations . . . . . . . . . . . 71
4 Information-Theoretic Limits 75
4.1 Overview of the standard noiseless model . . . . . . . . . . . . . 75
4.2 Proof of achievable rate for Bernoulli testing . . . . . . . . . . . . 79
4.3 Converse bound for Bernoulli testing . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 85
2
CONTENTS3
4.4 Improved rates with near-constant tests-per-item . . . . . . . . . 86
4.5 General converse and polynomial-time strategies . . . . . . . . . 89
4.6 Noisy settings . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 94
5 Other Topics in Group Testing 101
5.1 Approximate recovery . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 101
5.2 Adaptive testing with limited stages . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 105
5.3 Universality and counting defectives . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 109
5.4 Sublinear-time algorithms . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 114
5.5 The linear regime . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 124
5.6 Group testing with prior statistics . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 133
5.7 Explicit constructions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 139
5.8 Constrained group testing . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 141
5.9 Computational considerations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 145
5.10 Other group testing models . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 148
6 Conclusion and Open Problems 153
References 158
Abstract
The group testing problem concerns discovering a small number of defective
items within a large population by performing tests on pools of items. A test
is positive if the pool contains at least one defective, and negative if it contains
no defectives. This is a sparse inference problem with a combinatorial flavour,
with applications in medical testing, biology, telecommunications, information
technology, data science, and more.
In this monograph, we survey recent developments in the group testing
problem from an information-theoretic perspective. We cover several related
developments: efficient algorithms with practical storage and computation re-
quirements, achievability bounds for optimal decoding methods, and algorithm-
independent converse bounds. We assess the theoretical guarantees not only
in terms of scaling laws, but also in terms of the constant factors, leading to
the notion of therateof group testing, indicating the amount of information
learned per test. For the noiseless setting, we present a series of results leading
to optimal rates, which in turn imply optimality and suboptimality results of
various algorithms depending on the sparsity regime. We also survey analogous
developments in noisy settings.
In addition, we survey results concerning a number of variations on the
standard group testing problem, including approximate recovery criteria, adap-
tive algorithms with a limited number of stages, sublinear-time algorithms, and
settings with additional prior information, among others.
Preface to the second
edition
The first edition of ‘Group Testing: An Information Theory Perspective’ was
published in late 2019. This publication turned out to arrive at a similar time to
an important breakthrough work on the optimal rates of noiseless group testing,
by Coja-Oghlan, Gebhard, Hahn-Klimroth and Loick [76], which we were only
able to give a very brief mention at the end of the first edition. The late 2019
timing also happened to coincide with the worldwide spread of the Covid-19
disease – an extremely unfortunate event, but one that led to a surge of interest
in group testing as a potential way to screen people for the disease while making
efficient use of limited testing resources. Progress has continued to be made in
both the mathematics and applications of group testing, and the time seems
right to update this monograph to cover the recent and ongoing developments.
This second edition follows the same structure as the first edition, but we
have added material to cover a number of new developments that arose following
the original publication. Perhaps most notably, as mentioned above, the optimal
rates of noiseless group testing were established by Coja-Oghlanet al.[76], and
were shown to be attainable with polynomial-time decoding (Section 4.5). The
understanding of noisy group testing has also significantly improved, albeit with
more gaps still remaining compared to the noiseless setting (Section 4.6.2 as well
as Section 3.7 and Section 5.5.4). Several of the topics surveyed in Chapter 5
also saw advances, including near-optimal sublinear-time algorithms (Section
5.4) and new rates in linear sparsity regimes (Section 5.5). Moreover, notable
new topics added to Chapter 5 include ‘all-or-nothing’ thresholds (Section 5.1.2),
community-aware group testing (Section 5.6.2), and computational aspects of
group testing (Section 5.9). We have also added a more detailed treatment of
two group testing models with non-binary outcomes (Section 5.10).
While the second edition remains focused on theory and algorithms rather
than applications, we discuss Covid-19 testing in Section 1.7, and occasionally
further highlight this application throughout the monograph. For deeper cov-
erage of group testing as applied to Covid, including accounts of its use during
the pandemic, we direct the reader to the survey paper ‘Pooled testing and its
applications in the Covid-19 pandemic’ by Aldridge and Ellis [17].
This second edition, like its predecessor, concludes in Chapter 6 with a list
of open problems. Many of the open problems presented in the first edition have
now been fully or partially solved; we discuss the progress on those problems,
and we also pose some new ones.
2
Acknowledgments
From the first edition
We are very grateful to Sidharth Jaggi, who made significant contributions to
this project in its early stages and has provided helpful advice and feedback on
its later drafts.
We also thank our co-authors on various group testing papers whose results
are surveyed in this monograph: Leonardo Baldassini, Volkan Cevher, Karen
Gunderson, Thomas Kealy, and Dino Sejdinovic.
We have discussed this monograph and received helpful feedback on it from
many people, including George Atia, Mahdi Cheraghchi, Teddy Furon, Venkatesh
Saligrama, and Ashley Montanaro. We received many helpful comments from
two anonymous reviewers. Of course, any remaining errors and omissions are
our responsibility.
M. Aldridge was supported in part by the Heilbronn Institute for Mathe-
matical Research. J. Scarlett was supported by an NUS Early Career Research
Award. O. Johnson would like to thank Maria, Emily, and Becca for their
support.
Finally, we would like to thank the editorial board and staff ofFoundations
and Trends in Communications and Information Theoryfor their support with
this monograph.
Added in the second edition
We are grateful to Daniel McMorrow for reading the new additions to the second
edition and providing detailed feedback, and also to Sidharth Jaggi, Lena Krieg,
Pavlos Nikolopoulos, Olga Scheftelowitsch, Mahdi Soleymani, Nelvin Tan, I-
Hsiang Wang, and Ilias Zadik for their feedback on various specific parts.
In addition, it is a pleasure to thank more colleagues who have worked
with us on group testing problems: Wei Heng Bay, Steffen Bondorf, Thach
Bui, Binbin Chen, Junren Chen, Lorenzo Ciampiconi, Fraser Daly, David Ellis,
Oliver Gebhard, Bishwamittra Ghosh, Max Hahn-Klimroth, Ivan Lau, Philipp
Loick, Daniel McMorrow, Kuldeep Meel, Vivekanand Paligadu, Olaf Parczyk,
Pablo Pascual Cobo, Manuel Penschuck, Eric Price, Maurice Rolvien, Yang
Sun, Nelvin Tan, Way Tan, Bernard Teo, Lan Truong, Ramji Venkataramanan,
Haifeng Yu, Letian Yu, and Yuda Zhao.
3
Notation
nnumber of items (Definition 1.1)
knumber of defective items (Definition 1.1)
Kdefective set (Definition 1.1)
u= (u i) defectivity vector:u i =1(i∈K), shows if itemiis defective
(Definition 1.2)
αsparsity parameter in the sparse regimek= Θ(n α) (Remark
1.1)
βsparsity parameter in the linear regimek=βn(Remark 1.1)
Tnumber of tests (Definition 1.3)
X= (x ti) test design matrix:x ti =1if itemiis in testt;x ti =0otherwise
(Definition 1.3)
y= (y t) test outcomes (Definition 1.4)
∨Boolean inclusiveOR(Remark 1.2)
bKestimate of the defective set (Definition 1.5)
P(err) average error probability (Definition 1.6)
P(suc) success probability = 1−P(err) (Definition 1.6)
rate log 2
 n
k

/T(Definition 1.7)
O,o, Θ asymptotic ‘Big O’ notation
Ran achievable rate (Definition 1.8)
Rmaximum achievable rate (Definition 1.8)
S(i) the support of columni(Definition 1.9)
S(L) the union of supports S
i∈LS(i) (Definition 1.9)
pparameter for Bernoulli designs: each item is in each test inde-
pendently with probabilityp(Definition 2.2)
Lparameter for near-constant tests-per-item designs: each item
is inLtests sampled randomly with replacement (Definition
2.3)
νtest design parameter: for Bernoulli designs,p=ν/k(Defini-
tion 2.2); for near-constant tests-per-item designs,L=νT/k
(Definition 2.3)
4
NOTATION5
h(x) binary entropy function:h(x) =−xlog 2x−(1−
x) log2(1−x) (Theorem 2.2)
qproportion of defectives (Appendix to Chapter 1)
kaverage number of defectives (Appendix to Chapter
1)
p(y|m,ℓ) probability of observing outcomeyfrom a test con-
tainingℓdefective items andmitems in total (Defi-
nition 3.1)
ρ,φ,ϑ,ξnoise parameters in binary symmetric (Example 3.1),
addition (Example 3.2), dilution/Z channel (Example
3.3, 3.4), and erasure (Example 3.6) models
θ,θ threshold parameters in threshold group testing
model (Example 3.7)
∆ decoding parameter for NCOMP (Section 3.4)
γdecoding parameter for separate decoding of items
(Section 3.5) and information-theoretic decoder (Sec-
tion 4.2)
Cchan Shannon capacity of communication channel (Theo-
rem 3.1)
m(r)
i→t(ui),bm(r)
t→i(ui) item-to-test and test-to-item messages (Section 3.3)
N(i),N(t) neighbours of an item node and test node (Section
3.3)
XK submatrix of columns ofXindexed byK(Section
4.2.2)
XK a single row ofX K (Section 4.2.2)
V=V(X K) random number of defective items in the test indi-
cated byX(Section 4.2.2)
PY|V observation distribution depending on the test design
only throughV(Equation (4.3))
S0,S 1 partition of the defective set (Equation (4.4))
ıinformation density (Equation (4.6))
X0,τ,X 1,τ submatrices ofXcorresponding to (S 0,S 1) with
|S0|=τ(Equation (4.14))
X0,τ,X 1,τ subvectors ofX K corresponding to (S 0,S 1) with
|S0|=τ(Equation (4.16))
Iτ conditional mutual informationI(X 0,τ;Y|X 1,τ)
(Equation (4.16))
Di event that itemiis masked/disguised (Section 4.5.1)
Chapter 1
Introduction to Group
Testing
1.1 What is group testing?
The ‘group testing’ problem arose in the United States in the 1940s, when
large numbers of men were being conscripted into the army and needed to
be screened for syphilis. Since an accurate blood test (the Wassermann test)
exists for syphilis, one can take a sample of blood from each soldier, and test it.
However, since it is a rare disease, the vast majority of such tests will come back
negative. From an information-theoretic point of view, this testing procedure
seems inefficient, because each test is not particularly informative.
Robert Dorfman, in his seminal paper of 1943 [96], founded the subject of
group testing by noting that, for syphilis testing, the total number of tests
needed could be dramatically reduced by pooling samples. That is, one can
take blood samples from a ‘pool’ (or ‘group’) of many soldiers, mix the samples,
and perform the syphilis test on the pooled sample. If the test is sufficiently
precise, it should report whether or not any syphilis antigens are present in
the combined sample. If the test comes back negative, one learns that all the
soldiers in the pool are free of syphilis, whereas if the test comes back positive,
one learns thatat least oneof the soldiers in the pool must have syphilis. One
can use several such tests to discover which soldiers have syphilis, using fewer
tests than the number of soldiers. (The origins of the problem, including the
contributions of David Rosenblatt, are described in detail in [97, Section 1.1].)
Of course, this idealized testing model is a mathematical convenience; in
practice, a more realistic model could account for sources of error – for ex-
ample, that a large number of samples of negative blood could dilute syphilis
antigens below a detectable level. However, the idealization results in a use-
ful and interesting problem, which we will refer to asstandard noiseless group
testing.
Generally, we considernitems(in the above example, soldiers) of whichk
aredefective(have syphilis). A test on a subset of items returns positive if at
least one of the items is defective, and returns negative is all of the items are
nondefective. The central problem of group testing is then the following: Given
the number of itemsnand the number of defectivesk, how many such tests
6
1.1. WHAT IS GROUP TESTING?7
Tare required to accurately discover the defective items, and how can this be
achieved?
As we shall see, the number of tests required depends on various assumptions
on the mathematical model used. An important distinction is the following:
Adaptive vs. nonadaptiveUnder adaptive testing, the test pools are de-
signed sequentially, and each one can depend on the previous test out-
comes. Under nonadaptive testing, all the test pools are designed in ad-
vance, making them amenable to being implemented in parallel. Most
of the focus of this survey is on nonadaptive testing, though we present
adaptive results in Section 1.5 for comparison purposes, and consider the
intermediate case of algorithms with a fixed number of stages in Section
5.2. In Section 5.5 we consider adaptive testing in regimes with a relatively
larger number of defective items.
For nonadaptive testing, it is often useful to separate thedesignanddecoding
parts of the group testing problem. The design problem concerns the question
of how to choose the testing strategy – that is, which items should be placed
in which tests. The decoding (ordetection) problem consists of determining
which items are defective given the test designs and their outcomes, ideally in
a computationally efficient manner.
The number of tests required to achieve ‘success’ depends on our criteria for
declaring success:
Zero error probability vs. small error probabilityUnder a zero-error prob-
ability criterion, require being certain we will recover the defective set.
Under a small error probability criterion, it suffices to recover the defec-
tive set with high probability. In particular, the set of defective items
and/or the recovery algorithm may be random, and we may allow a toler-
anceϵ >0 on the error probability with respect to this randomness. (In
other sparse recovery problems, a similar distinction is sometimes made
using the terminology ‘for-each setting’ and ‘for-all setting’ [139].) We will
mostly focus on the small error probability criterion, but we give zero-error
results in Section 1.6 for comparison purposes.
Exact recovery vs. approximate recoveryWith an exact recovery crite-
rion, we require that every defective item is correctly classified as defec-
tive, and every nondefective item is correctly classified as nondefective.
With approximate recovery, we may tolerate having some small number
of incorrectly classified items – perhaps with different demands for false
positives (nondefective items incorrectly classified as defective) and false
negatives (defective items incorrectly classified as nondefective). For the
most part, this survey focuses on the exact recovery criterion; some vari-
ants of approximate recovery are discussed in Section 5.1.
When considering more realistic settings, it is important to consider group
testing models that do not fit into the standard noiseless group testing idealiza-
tion we began by discussing. Important considerations include:
Noiseless vs. noisy testingUnder noiseless testing, we are guaranteed that
the test procedure works perfectly: We get a negative test outcome if all
items in the testing pool are nondefective, and a positive outcome if at
8CHAPTER 1. INTRODUCTION TO GROUP TESTING
least one item in the pool is defective. Under noisy testing, errors can
occur, either according to some specified random model or in an adver-
sarial manner. The first two chapters of this survey describe results in
the noiseless case for simplicity, before the noisy case is introduced and
discussed from Chapter 3 onwards.
Binary vs. nonbinary outcomesOur description of standard group testing
involves tests with binary outcomes – that is, positive or negative results.
In practice, we may find it useful to consider tests with a wider range of
outcomes, perhaps corresponding to some idea of weak and strong pos-
itivity, according to the numbers of defective and nondefective items in
the test, or even the ‘strength of defectivity’ of individual items. In such
settings, the test matrix may even be nonbinary to indicate the ‘amount’
of each item included in each test. We discuss these matters further in
Sections 3.1 and 4.6.
Further to the above distinctions, group testing results can also depend
on the assumed distribution of the defective items among all items, and the
decoder’s knowledge (or lack of knowledge) of this distribution. In general, the
true defective set could have an arbitrary prior distribution over all subsets of
items. However, the following are important distinctions:
Combinatorial vs. i.i.d. priorFor mathematical convenience, we will usu-
ally consider the scenario where there is a fixed number of defectives, and
the defective set is uniformly random among all sets of this size. We refer
to this as thecombinatorialprior (the terminologyhypergeometric group
testingis also used). Alternatively (and perhaps more realistically), one
might imagine that each item is defective independently with the same
fixed probabilityq, which we call thei.i.d. prior. In the appendix to this
chapter, we discuss how results can be transferred from one prior to the
other under suitable assumptions. Furthermore, in Section 5.6, we discuss
a variant of the i.i.d. prior in which each item has a different prior proba-
bility of being defective, as well as more sophisticated priors in which the
defectives are known to exhibit certain correlations or clustering structure.
Known vs. unknown number of defectivesWe may wish to distinguish
between algorithms that require knowledge of the true number of defec-
tives, and those that do not. An intermediate class of algorithms may
be given bounds or approximations to the true number of defectives (see
Remark 2.3). In Section 5.3, we discuss procedures that use pooled tests
to estimate the number of defective items.
In this survey, we primarily consider the combinatorial prior. Furthermore, for
the purpose of proving mathematical results, we will sometimes make the con-
venient assumption thatkis known. However, in our consideration of practical
decoding methods in Chapters 2 and 3, we focus on algorithms that do not
require knowledge ofk.
1.2 About this survey
The existing literature contains several excellent surveys of various aspects of
group testing. The paper by Wolf [290] gives an overview of the early history,
1.2. ABOUT THIS SUR VEY9
following Dorfman’s original work [96], with a particular focus on adaptive al-
gorithms. The textbooks of Du and Hwang [97, 98] give extensive background
on group testing, especially on adaptive testing, zero-error nonadaptive testing,
and applications. The lecture notes of D’yachkov [99] focus primarily on the
zero-error nonadaptive setting, considering both fundamental limits and explicit
constructions. For the small-error setting, significant progress was made in the
Russian literature in the 1970s and 80s, particularly for nonadaptive testing in
the very sparse regime wherekis constant asntends to infinity – the review
paper of Malyutov [213] is a useful guide to this work (see also [99, Ch. 6]). A
more recent survey by Aldridge and Ellis [17] covers the use of group testing in
the Covid-19 pandemic.
The focus of this survey is distinct from these previous works. In contrast
with the adaptive and zero-error settings covered in [97, 99, 290], here we concen-
trate on the fundamentally distinct nonadaptive setting with a small (nonzero)
error probability. While this setting was also the focus of [213], we survey a wide
variety of recent algorithmic and information-theoretic developments not cov-
ered there, as well as considering a much wider range of sparsity regimes (that
is, scaling behaviour ofkasn→∞). We focus in particular on the ‘sparse
regime’ wherek= Θ(n α) for someα∈(0,1), which comes with a variety chal-
lenges compared to the ‘very sparse regime’ in whichkis constant. Another
key feature of our survey is that we consider not only order-optimality results,
but also quantify the performance of algorithms in terms of the precise constant
factors, as captured by therateof group testing. (While much of [98] focuses
on the zero-error setting, a variety of probabilistic constructions are discussed
in its fifth chapter, although the concept of a rate is not explicitly considered.)
Much of the work that we survey was inspired by the re-emergence of group
testing in the information theory community following the paper of Atia and
Saligrama [24]. However, to the best of our knowledge, the connection between
group testing and information theory was first formally made by Sobel and Groll
[258, Appendix A], and was used frequently in the works surveyed in [213].
An outline of the rest of the survey is as follows. In the remainder of this
chapter, we give basic definitions and fix notation (Section 1.3), introduce the
information-theoretic terminology of rate and capacity that we will use through-
out the monograph (Section 1.4), and briefly review results for adaptive (Section
1.5) and zero-error (Section 1.6) group testing algorithms, to provide a bench-
mark for other subsequent results. In Section 1.7, we discuss some applications
of group testing in biology, communications, information technology, and data
science. In a technical appendix to this chapter, we discuss the relationship
between two common models for the defective set.
In Chapter 2, we introduce a variety of nonadaptive algorithms for noiseless
group testing, and discuss their performance. Chapter 3 shows how these ideas
can be extended to various noisy group testing models.
Chapter 4 reviews the fundamental information-theoretic limits of group
testing. This material is mostly independent of Chapters 2 and 3 and could be
read before them, although readers may find that the more concrete algorithmic
approaches of the earlier chapters provide helpful intuition.
In Chapter 5, we discuss a range of variations and extensions of the standard
group testing problem. The topics considered are approximate recovery of the
defective set (Section 5.1), adaptive testing with limited stages (Section 5.2),
counting the number of defective items (Section 5.3), decoding algorithms that
10CHAPTER 1. INTRODUCTION TO GROUP TESTING
run in sublinear time (Section 5.4), the linear sparsity regimek= Θ(n) (Sec-
tion 5.5), group testing with more general prior distributions on the defective
set (Section 5.6), explicit constructions of test designs (Section 5.7), group test-
ing under constraints on the design (Section 5.8), computational considerations
(Section 5.9), and more general group testing models (Section 5.10). Each of
these sections gives a brief outline of the topic with references to more detailed
work, and can mostly be read independently of one another. Finally, we con-
clude in Chapter 6 with a partial list of interesting open problems, as well as
a summary of previously open problems from the first edition that have since
been fully or partially solved.
For key results in the survey, we include either full proofs or proof sketches
(for brevity). For other results that are not our main focus, we may omit proofs
and instead provide pointers to the relevant references.
1.3 Basic definitions and notation
We now describe the group testing problem in more formal mathematical lan-
guage.
Definition 1.1.We writenfor the number of items, which we label as{1,2,...,n}.
We writeK⊂{1,2,...,n}for the set of defective items (thedefective set), and
writek=|K|for the number of defectives.
Definition 1.2.We writeu i =1to denote that itemi∈Kis defective, and
ui =0to denote thati̸∈Kis nondefective. In other words, we defineu i as an
indicator random variableu i =1{i∈K}. We then writeu= (u i)∈{0,1} n for
thedefectivity vector. (In some contexts, an uppercaseUwill denote arandom
defectivity vector.)
Remark1.1.We are interested in the case that the number of itemsnis large,
and accordingly consider asymptotic results asn→∞. We use the standard
‘Big O’ notationO(·),o(·), and Θ(·) to denote asymptotic behaviour in this
limit, and we writef n∼g n to mean that lim n→∞
fn
gn
= 1. We consider three
scaling regimes for the number of defectivesk:
The very sparse regime:kis constant (or bounded ask=O(1)) asn→∞;
The sparse regime:kscales sublinearly ask= Θ(n α) for somesparsity pa-
rameterα∈[0,1) asn→∞.
The linear regime:kscales linearly ask∼βnforβ∈(0,1) asn→∞.
We are primarily interested in the case that defectivity is rare, where group
testing has the greatest gains, though the linear regime is still of significant
interest and will be considered in Section 5.5. Much of the early work on group
testing considered only the very sparse regime, which is now quite well under-
stood – see, for example, [213] and the references therein – so we will concentrate
primarily on the wider sparse regime.
The caseα= 0, which covers the very sparse regime, usually behaves the
same as smallαbut sometimes requires slightly different analysis to allow for the
fact thatkmay not tend to∞. Hence, for brevity, we typically only explicitly
deal with the casesα∈(0,1).
1.3. BASIC DEFINITIONS AND NOTATION11
Encoder Channel Decoder
K XK Y ˆK
Message Codeword Output Estimate
Figure 1.1: Group testing interpreted as a channel coding problem. The no-
tationX K denotes theT×ksubmatrix ofXobtained by keeping only thek
columns indexed byK, and the outputYis the ‘OR’ of thesekcolumns.
We assume for the most part that the true defective setKis uniformly
random from the
 n
k

sets of items of sizek(the ‘combinatorial prior’). The
assumption thatkis known exactly is often mathematically convenient, but
unrealistic in most applications. For this reason, in Chapters 2 and 3 we focus
primarily on decoding algorithms that do not require knowledge ofk. However,
there exist nonadaptive algorithms that can accurately estimate the number of
defectives usingO(logn) tests (see Section 5.3 below), which could form the
first part of a two-stage algorithm, if permitted.
Definition 1.3.We writeT=T(n) for thenumber of testsperformed, and
label the tests{1,2,...,T}. To keep track of the design of the test pools,
we writex ti =1to denote that itemi∈{1,2,...,n}is in the pool for test
t∈{1,2,...,T}, andx ti =0to denote that itemiis not in the pool for testt.
We gather these into a matrixX∈{0,1} T×n , which we shall refer to as thetest
matrixortest design.
To our knowledge, this matrix representation was introduced by Katona
[178]. It can be helpful to think of group testing in a channel coding frame-
work, where the particular defective setKacts like the source message, finding
the defective set can be thought of as decoding, and the matrixXacts like
the codebook. See Figure 1.1 for an illustration. See also [213] for a related
interpretation of group testing as a type ofmultiple-access channel.
Similarly to the channel coding problem, explicit deterministic matrix de-
signs often fail to achieve even order-optimal performance (see Sections 1.6 and
5.7 for discussion). Following the development and successes of randomized
channel codes (discussed further below), it is therefore a natural development
to consider randomized test designs. We will use a capitalX ti to denote the
entries of a random testing matrix. Some designs of particular interest include
the following:
Bernoulli designIn the Bernoulli design, each item is included in each test
independently at random with some fixed probabilityp. That is, we have
P(Xti =1) =pandP(X ti =0) = 1−p, i.i.d. overi∈ {1,2,...,n}
andt∈ {1,2,...,T}. Typically the parameterpis chosen to scale as
p= Θ(1/k). See Definition 2.2 for more details.
Constant tests-per-itemIn the constant tests-per-item design, each item is
included in some fixed numberLof tests, with theLtests for each item
chosen uniformly at random, independent from the choices for all other
items. In terms of the testing matrixX, we have independent columns
of constant weight. Typically the parameterLis chosen to scale asL=
12CHAPTER 1. INTRODUCTION TO GROUP TESTING
Θ(T/k). In fact, it is often more mathematically convenient to analyse the
similarnear-constant tests-per-item(near-constant column weight) design,
where theLtests for each item are chosen uniformly at randomwith
replacement– see Definition 2.3 for more details.
Doubly regular designOne can also consider designs with both a constant
numberLof tests-per-item (column weight) and also a constant numberm
of items-per-test (row weight), withnL=mT. For example, the matrix
may be picked uniformly at random according to these constraints, or
alternatively,Lrandom matrices with column weight 1 and row weightm
may be stacked vertically. Certain ‘near-constant’ variants may also be
considered. Again,L= Θ(T/k) (or equivalently,m= Θ(n/k)) is a useful
scaling. We will only briefly touch on these designs in this monograph, in
parts of Sections 5.5 and 5.8, but mention that they were studied in the
papers [218, 280, 14, 268], among others.
As hinted above, these random constructions can be viewed as analogous to
random coding in channel coding, which is ubiquitous for proving achievability
bounds. However, while standard random coding designs in channel coding
are impractical due to the exponential storage and computation required, the
above designs can still be practical, since the random matrix only containsT×n
entries. In this sense, the constructions are in fact more akin to random linear
codes, random LDPC codes, and so on.
We writey t∈{0,1}for theoutcomeof testt∈{1,2,...,T}, wherey t =1
denotes a positive outcome andy t =0a negative outcome. Recall that in the
standard noiseless model, we haveyt =0if all items in the test are nondefective,
andy t =1if at least one item in the test is defective. Formally, we have the
following.
Definition 1.4.FixnandT. Given a defective setK⊂{1,2,...,n}and a
test designX∈{0,1} T×n , thestandard noiseless group testing modelis defined
by the outcomes
yt =
(
1if there existsi∈Kwithx ti =1,
0if for alli∈Kwe havex ti =0. (1.1)
We writey= (y t)∈{0,1} T for the vector of test outcomes.
Remark1.2.A concise way to write (1.1) is using the Boolean inclusiveOR(or
disjunction) operator∨, where0∨0=0and0∨1=1∨0=1∨1=1. Then,
yt =
_
i∈K
xti; (1.2)
or, with the understanding thatORis taken component-wise,
y=
_
i∈K
xi.(1.3)
Using the defectivity vector notation of Definition 1.2, we can rewrite (1.2) in
analogy with matrix multiplication as
yt =
_
i
xtiui.(1.4)
1.3. BASIC DEFINITIONS AND NOTATION13
Outcome
1 1 1 1 0 0 0 0 Positive
0 0 0 0 1 1 1 1 Positive
1 1 0 0 0 0 0 0 Negative
0 0 1 0 0 0 0 0 Positive
0 0 1 0 1 1 0 0 Positive
0 0 0 0 1 0 0 0 Positive
Figure 1.2: Example of a group testing procedure and its outcomes. Icons
for defective individuals (items 3 and 5) are filled, and icons for nondefective
individuals are unfilled. The testing matrixXis shown beneath the individuals,
where elementsxti are circled for emphasis ifxti =1and individualiis defective.
Hence, a test is positive if and only if it contains at least one circled1.
y
1 1 1 1 0 0 0 0 1
0 0 0 0 1 1 1 1 1
1 1 0 0 0 0 0 0 0
0 0 1 0 0 0 0 0 1
0 0 1 0 1 1 0 1 1
0 0 0 0 1 0 0 0 1
Figure 1.3: Group testing inference problem. We write1for a positive test and
0for a negative test, but otherwise the matrixXis exactly as in Figure 1.2
above. The defectivity status of the individuals is now unknown, and we hope
to infer it from the outcomesyand matrixX.
Note that the nonlinearity of the∨operation is what gives group testing its spe-
cific character. Indeed, we can consider (1.4) to be a nonlinear ‘Boolean coun-
terpart’ to the well-known compressed sensing problem in which linear models
are widely adopted [137].
We illustrate a simple group testing procedure in Figure 1.2, where the
defective items are represented by filled icons, and so it is clear that the positive
tests are those containing at least one defective item.
Given the test designXand the outcomesy, we wish to find the defective
set. Figure 1.3 represents the inference problem we are required to solve – the
defectivity status of particular individuals is hidden, and we are required to infer
it from the matrixXand the vector of outcomesy. In Figure 1.3, we write1
for a positive test and0for a negative test. In general we write ˆK= ˆK(X,y)
for our estimate of the defective set.
Definition 1.5.Adecoding(or detection)algorithmis a (possibly random-
ized) function ˆK:{0,1} T×n×{0,1} T→P({1,2,...,n}), where the power-set
14CHAPTER 1. INTRODUCTION TO GROUP TESTING
P({1,2,...,n}) is the collection of subsets of items.
Under the exact recovery criterion, we succeed when ˆK=K, while under
approximate recovery, we succeed if ˆKis close toKin some predefined sense
(see Section 5.1). Since we focus our attention on the former, we provide its
formal definition as follows.
Definition 1.6.Under the exact recovery criterion, the (average)error proba-
bilityfor noiseless group testing with a combinatorial prior is
P(err) := 1 n
k

X
K:|K|=k
P
  ˆK(X,y)̸=K|K

,(1.5)
whereyis related toXandKvia the group testing model and the probabil-
ityPis over the randomness in the test designX(if randomized), the group
testing model (if random noise is present), and the decoding algorithm ˆK(if
randomized). We callP(suc) := 1−P(err) thesuccess probability.
We note that this average error probability refers to an average over a uni-
formly distributed choice of defective setK, where we can think of this random-
ness as being introduced by nature. Even in a setting where the true defective
setKis actually deterministic, this can be a useful way to think of randomness
in the model. Since the outcomes of the tests only depend on the columns of the
test matrixXcorresponding toK, the same average error probability is achieved
even for a fixedKby any exchangeable matrix design (that is, one where the dis-
tribution ofXis invariant under uniformly-chosen column permutations). This
includes Bernoulli, near-constant tests-per-item, and doubly regular designs, as
well as any deterministic matrix construction acted on by uniformly random
column permutations.
1.4 Counting bound and rate
Recall that the goal is, givennandk, to chooseXand ˆKsuch thatTis as small
as possible, while keeping the error probabilityP(err) small.
Supposing momentarily that we were to require an error probability ofex-
actlyzero, a simple counting argument based on the pigeonhole principle reveals
that we requireT≥log 2
 n
k

: There are only 2 T combinations of test results,
but there are
 n
k

possible defective sets that each must give a different set of
results. This argument is valid regardless of whether the test design is adaptive
or nonadaptive.
The preceding argument extends without too much difficulty to the nonzero
error probability case. For example, Chanet al.[52] used an argument based
on Fano’s inequality to prove that
P(suc)≤ T
log2
 n
k
,(1.6)
which they refer to as ‘folklore’, while Baldassini, Johnson, and Aldridge gave
the following tighter bound on the success probability [29, Theorem 3.1] (see
also [169])
1.4. COUNTING BOUND AND RATE15
Theorem 1.1(Counting bound).Any algorithm (adaptive or nonadaptive) for
recovering the defective set withTtests has success probability satisfying
P(suc)≤ 2T
 n
k
.(1.7)
In particular,P(suc)→0asn→∞wheneverT≤(1−η) log 2
 n
k

for arbitrarily
smallη >0.
From an information-theoretic viewpoint, this result essentially states that
since the prior uncertainty is log 2
 n
k

for a uniformly random defective set, and
each test is a yes/no answer revealing at most 1 bit of information, we require
at least log 2
 n
k

tests. Because the result is based on counting the number of
defective sets, we refer to it as thecounting bound, often using this terminology
for both the asymptotic and non-asymptotic versions when the distinction is
clear from the context.
With this mind, it will be useful to think about how many bits of information
we learn (on average) per test. Using an analogy with channel coding, we shall
call this therateof group testing. In general, if the defective setKis chosen
from some underlying random process with entropyH, then for a group testing
strategy withTtests, we define the rate to beH/T. (See Section 5.6 for
further discussion of this general version.) In particular, under a combinatorial
prior, where the defective set is chosen uniformly from the
 n
k

possible sets, the
entropy isH= log 2
 n
k

, leading to the following definition.
Definition 1.7.Given a group testing strategy under a combinatorial prior
withnitems,kdefective items, andTtests, we define therateto be
rate := log2
 n
k

T .(1.8)
This definition was proposed for the combinatorial prior by Baldassini, Aldridge
and Johnson [29], and extended to the general case (see Definition 5.2) in
[180]. This definition generalizes a similar earlier definition of rate by Malyutov
[212, 213], which applied only in the very sparse (constantk) regime.
We note the following well-known bounds on the binomial coefficient (see
for example [81, p. 1186]):
n
k
k
≤
n
k

≤
en
k
k
.(1.9)
Thus, we have the asymptotic expression
log2
n
k

=klog 2
n
k +O(k),(1.10)
and in the sparse regimek= Θ(n α) forα∈[0,1), we have the asymptotic
equivalence
log2
n
k

∼klog 2
n
k∼(1−α)klog 2n= (1−α)
ln 2 klnn.(1.11)
Thus, to achieve a positive rate in this regime, we seek group testing strategies
withT=O(klogn) tests. In contrast, in Section 5.5, we will observe contrasting
behaviour of the binomial coefficient in the linear regimek∼βn, expressed in
(5.8).
16CHAPTER 1. INTRODUCTION TO GROUP TESTING
Definition 1.8.Consider a group testing problem, possibly with some aspects
fixed (for example, the random test design or the decoding algorithm), in a
setting where the number of defectives scales ask=k(n) according to some
function (e.g.,k(n) = Θ(n α) withα∈(0,1)).
1. We say a rateRisachievableif, for anyδ,ϵ >0, fornsufficiently large
there exists a group testing strategy with a number of testsT=T(n) such
that the rate satisfies
rate = log2
 n
k

T >R−δ,(1.12)
and the error probabilityP(err) is at mostϵ.
2. We say a rateRiszero-error achievableif, for anyδ >0, fornsufficiently
large, there exists a group testing strategy with a number of testsT=T(n)
such that the rate exceedsR−δ, andP(err) = 0.
3. Given a random or deterministic test matrix construction (design), we
define themaximum achievable rateto be the supremum of all achievable
rates that can be achieved by any decoding algorithm. We sometimes also
use this terminology when the decoding algorithm is fixed. For example,
we write RBern for the maximum rate achieved by Bernoulli designs and
any decoding algorithm, and R
COMP
Bern for the maximum rate achieved by
Bernoulli rates using the COMP algorithm (to be described in Section
2.3).
4. Similarly, themaximum zero-error achievable rateis the supremum of all
zero-error achievable rates for a particular design.
5. We define thecapacityCto be the supremum of all achievable rates, and
thezero-error capacityC 0 to be the supremum of all zero-error achievable
rates. Whereas the notion ofmaximum achievable rateallows test design
and/or decoding algorithm to be fixed, the definition of capacity optimizes
over both.
Note that these notions of rate and capacity may depend on the scaling of
k(n). In our achievability and converse bounds for the sparse regimek= Θ(n α),
the maximum rate will typically vary withα, but will not depend on the implied
constant in the Θ(·) notation.
Remark1.3.Note that the counting bound (Theorem 1.1) gives us a universal
upper boundC≤1 on the capacity. In fact, it also implies the so-called strong
converse: The error probabilityP(err) tends to 1 whenT≤(1−η) log 2
 n
k

for
arbitrarily smallη >0, which corresponds to a rateR≥1/(1−η)>1.
We are interested in determining when the upper boundC= 1 can or cannot
be achieved, as well as determining how close practical algorithms can come to
achieving it. (We discuss what we mean by ‘practical’ in this context in Section
2.1.)
We will observe the following results for noiseless group testing in the sparse
regimek= Θ(n α), which are illustrated in Figure 1.4:
Adaptive testingis very powerful, in that both the zero-error and small-error
capacity equalC 0 =C= 1 for allα∈[0,1) (see Section 1.5).
1.4. COUNTING BOUND AND RATE17
0 0.5 1
0.5
1
Sparsity parameter α
Rate
Adaptive
Nonadaptive small-error:
       Bernoulli design
       Near-constant col. wt.
Nonadaptive zero-error
Figure 1.4: Achievable rates for noiseless group testing withk= Θ(n α) for a
sparsity parameterα∈(0,1): the adaptive capacity isC= 1; the nonadaptive
zero-error capacity isC 0 = 0; and the achievable rates for nonadaptive small-
error group testing are given in Theorem 4.1 for Bernoulli designs and Theorem
4.2 for near-constant column weight designs. (The rate of the near-constant
column weight design is in fact the best possible.)
Zero-error nonadaptive testingis much weaker, in the sense that the zero-
error capacity isC 0 = 0 for allα∈(0,1) (see Section 1.6).
Small-error nonadaptive testingis more complicated. The capacity isC=
1 forα∈[0,0.409]; this is achievable with a Bernoulli design forα<1/3
(Theorem 4.1), and with a (near-)constant tests-per-item design for the
full interval (Theorem 4.2). The capacity forα∈(0.409,1) turns out to
also be attained by the latter design, and steadily decreases from 1 to 0 as
αincreases within this range. We discuss these results further in Chapter
4, and discuss rates for practical algorithms in Chapter 2.
This survey is mostly concerned with nonadaptive group testing with small
error probability, starting with the noiseless setting (Chapter 2). Later in
the monograph, we will expand our attention to the noisy nonadaptive set-
ting (Chapter 3), approximate recovery criteria (Section 5.1), adaptive testing
with limited stages (Section 5.2), and the linear regimek= Θ(n) (Section 5.5),
among others.
It will be useful to compare the results to come with various well-established
results for adaptive testing and for zero-error nonadaptive testing (in the noise-
less setting). The next two sections provide a brief review of these two models.
18CHAPTER 1. INTRODUCTION TO GROUP TESTING
1.5 A brief review of noiseless adaptive group
testing
Much of the early group testing literature focused on adaptive procedures. Dorf-
man’s original paper [96] proposed a simple procedure where items were parti-
tioned into pools that undergo primary testing: A negative test indicates that
all the items in that set are definitely nondefective, whereas for within the pos-
itive tests, all items are subsequently tested individually. It is easily checked
(see, for example, [188], [117, Ex. 26, Section IX.9]) that the optimal partition
(assuming thatkis known) comprises
√
nkpools, each of size
p
n/k. Dorfman’s
strategy therefore requires requires at most
T=
√
nk+k
rn
k = 2
√
nk(1.13)
tests, since the worst case is that allkitems are in different pools.
Sterrett [264] showed that improvements can be made by testing items in a
positive pool individually until a defective item is found, and then re-testing all
remaining items from the pool together. Li [188] and Finucan [118] provided
variants of Dorfman’s scheme based on multi-stage adaptive designs. We will
revisit Dorfman’s strategy in Section 5.5, where we will consider the linear
regimek∼βnand a broader class of strategies called ‘conservative two-stage
group testing’ [14].
The work of Sobel and Groll [258] introduced the crucial idea of recursively
splitting the set, with their later paper [259] showing that such a procedure
performs well even if the number of defectives is unknown. We will describe
the procedure ofbinary splitting, which lies at the heart of many adaptive algo-
rithms. Suppose we have a setAof items. We can test whetherAcontains any
defectives, and, if it does, discover a defective item through binary splitting as
follows.
Algorithm 1.1(Binary splitting).Given a setA:
1. Initialize the algorithm with setA. Perform a single test containing every
item inA.
2. If the preceding test is negative,Acontains no defective items, and we
halt. If the test is positive, continue.
3. IfAconsists of a single item, then that item is defective, and we halt.
Otherwise, pick half of the items inA, and call this setB. Perform a
single test of the poolB.
4. If the test is positive, setA:=B. If the test is negative, setA:=A\B.
Return to Step 3.
The key idea is to observe that even if the test in Step 3 is negative, we still
gain information from it; sinceAcontained at least one defective (as confirmed
by Steps 1 and 2), andBcontained no defective, we can be certain thatA\B
contains at least one defective.
In Step 3, when picking the setBto be half the size ofA, we can round
|A|/2 in either direction. Since the size of the setAessentially halves on each
1.5. A REVIEW OF NOISELESS ADAPTIVE GROUP TESTING19
loop through the algorithm, we see that binary splitting finds a defective item
in at most⌈log 2|A|⌉adaptive tests, or confirms there are no defective items in
a single test. We conclude the following.
Theorem 1.2.We can find allkdefectives in a set ofnitems by repeated
rounds of Algorithm 1.1, using a total ofklog 2n+O(k)adaptive tests, even
whenkis unknown. In the sparse regimek= Θ(n α)withα∈[0,1), this gives
an achievable rate of1−α.
Proof.In the first round, we initialize the binary splitting algorithm usingA=
{1,2,...,n}, and find the first defective (denoted byd 1) using at most⌈log 2n⌉
tests.
In subsequent rounds, if we have found defectives{d 1,...,d r}in the first
rrounds, then the (r+ 1)-th round of Algorithm 1.1 is initialized withA=
{1,2,...,n}\{d 1,d 2,...,d r}. We perform one further test to determine whether
{1,2,...,n}\{d 1,d 2,...,d r}contains at least one defective. If not, we are done.
If it does, we find the next defective item using at most⌈log 2(n−r)⌉≤⌈log 2n⌉
tests. We repeat the procedure until no defective items remain, and the result
follows.
Note that forα>0, this rate 1−αfails to match the counting bound of 1.
However, we can reduce the number of tests required toklog 2(n/k)+O(k), thus
raising the rate to 1 for allα∈[0,1), by using a variant of Hwang’s generalized
binary splitting algorithm [158]. The key idea is to notice that, unless there are
very few defectives remaining, the first tests in each round of the repeated binary
splitting algorithm are overwhelmingly likely to be positive, and are therefore
very uninformative. A refined procedure is as follows:
Algorithm 1.2.Divide thenitems intoksubsets of sizen/k(rounding if
necessary), and apply Algorithm 1.1 to each subset in turn.
Note that each of these subsets contains an average of one defective. Using
the procedure above, if thei-th subset containsk i defectives, takingk=k i and
n=n/kin Theorem 1.2, we can find them all usingk i log2(n/k) +O(ki) tests,
or confirm the absence of any defectives with one test ifki = 0. Adding together
the number of tests over each subset, we deduce the result.
Combining this analysis with the upper boundC≤1 (Remark 1.3), we
deduce the following.
Theorem 1.3.Using Algorithm 1.2, we can find the defective set with certainty
usingklog 2(n/k) +O(k)adaptive tests. Thus, the capacity of adaptive group
testing in the sparse regimek= Θ(n α)isC 0 =C= 1for allα∈[0,1).
This theorem follows directly from the work of Hwang [158], and it was
explicitly noted that such an algorithm attains the capacity of adaptive group
testing by Baldassini, Johnson, and Aldridge [29].
The precise form of Hwang’s generalized binary splitting algorithm [158]
used a variant of this method, with various tweaks to reduce theO(k) term.
For example, the set sizes are chosen to be powers of 2 at each stage, so the
splitting step in Algorithm 1.1 is always exact. Further, items appearing at
any stage in a negative test are removed completely, and the valuesnandk
of remaining items are updated as the algorithm progresses. Some subsequent
20CHAPTER 1. INTRODUCTION TO GROUP TESTING
work further reduced the implied constant in theO(k) term in the expression
klog 2(n/k) +O(k) above; for example, Allemann [18] reduced it to 0.255kplus
lower order terms.
We see that algorithms based on binary splitting are very effective when
the problem is sparse, withkmuch smaller thann. For denser problems, the
advantage may be diminished; for instance, whenkis a large enough fraction
ofn, it turns out that adaptive group testing offers no performance advantage
over the simple strategy of individually testing every item once. For example,
for adaptive zero-error combinatorial testing, Riccio and Colbourn [234] proved
that no algorithm can outperform individual testing ifk≥0.369n, while the
Hu–Hwang–Wang conjecture [155] suggests that such a result remains true for
k≥n/3. We further discuss adaptive (and nonadaptive) group testing in the
linear regimek= Θ(n) in Section 5.5. We re-iterate that the focus of this
survey is on the sparse regime,k= Θ(n α) withα∈[0,1), where group testing
techniques have the greatest gains over individual testing.
1.6 A brief review of zero-error nonadaptive
group testing
In this section, we discuss nonadaptive group testing with under the zero error
criterion – that is, we must be certain of recovering the defective set (of a given
size), without any error probability. In particular, we examine the important
concepts of separable and disjunct matrices. The literature in this area is deep
and wide-ranging, and we shall barely scratch the surface here. The papers of
Kautz and Singleton [179] and D’yachkov and Rykov [100] are classic early works
in this area, while the textbook of Du and Hwang [97] provides a comprehensive
survey.
We first introduce some simple notation regarding the support sets of binary
vectors.
Definition 1.9.Given a test matrixX= (x ti)∈{0,1} T×n , we writeS(i) :=
{t:x ti =1}for the support of columni. Further, for any subsetL ⊆
{1,2,...,n}of columns, we writeS(L) = S
i∈LS(i) for the union of their sup-
ports. (By convention,S(∅) =∅.)
Observe thatS(i) is the set of tests containing itemi, whileS(K) is the set
of positive tests when the defective set isK.
We now proceed to introduce two definitions associated with the test ma-
trices, which are widely studied – see for example [97, Chapter 7] – and are
fundamental to zero-error nonadaptive group testing.
Definition 1.10.A matrixXis calledk-separableif the support unionsS(L)
are distinct over all subsetsL⊆{1,2,...,n}of size|L|=k.
A matrixXis called ¯k-separableif the support unionsS(L) are distinct over
all subsetsL⊆{1,2,...,n}of size|L|≤k.
Clearly, using ak-separable matrix as a test design ensures that group testing
will provide different outcomes for each possible defective set of sizek; thus,
provided that there are exactlykdefectives, it is certain that the true defective
set can be found (at least given enough computation – we discuss what it means
1.6. A BRIEF REVIEW OF ZERO-ERROR GROUP TESTING21
for an algorithm to be ‘practical’ in Section 2.1). In fact, it is clear thatk-
separability of the test matrix is also a necessary condition for zero-error group
testing to be possible: If the matrix is not separable, then there must be two
setsL 1 andL 2 withS(L 1) =S(L 2) which cannot be distinguished from the
test outcomes. Similarly, a ¯k-separable test design ensures finding the defective
set provided that there areat mostkdefectives.
Thus, givennandk, we want to know how largeTmust be for ak-separable
(T×n)-matrix to exist.
An important related definition is that of a disjunct matrix.
Definition 1.11.A matrixXis calledk-disjunctif for any subsetL⊆{1,2,...,n}
of size|L|=kand anyi̸∈L, the setS(i)\S(L) is non-empty (i.e.,S(i) is not
a subset ofS(L)).
In group testing language, this ensures that no nondefective item appears
only in positive tests. This not only guarantees that the defective set can be
found, but also reveals how to do so easily: Any item that appears in a negative
test is nondefective, while an item that appears solely in positive tests is defec-
tive. (We will study this simple algorithm under the name COMP in Chapter
2.)
We briefly mention that the notions ofk-separability, ¯k-separability, andk-
disjunctness often appear in the literature under different names. In particular,
the columns of ak-disjunct matrix are often said to form ak-cover free family,
and the terminologysuperimposed codeis often used to refer to the columns of
either a ¯k-separable matrix or ak-disjunct matrix (see, for example, [179, 97,
101]).
It is clear that the implications
k-disjunct⇒ ¯k-separable⇒k-separable (1.14)
hold. Furthermore, Chen and Hwang [56] showed that the number of tests
Trequired for separability and disjunctness in fact have the same order-wise
scaling, proving the following.
Theorem 1.4.LetXbe2k-separable. Then there exists ak-disjunct matrix
formed by adding at most one row toX.
Because of this, attention is often focused on bounds for disjunct matrices,
since such bounds are typically easier to derive, and these results can be easily
converted to statements on separable matrices using (1.14) and Theorem 1.4.
We now proceed to consider impossibility (converse) results, showing that
attaining thek-disjunct property is impossible when the number of testsTis
too small. The following result, which D’yachkov and Rykov [100] attribute to
Bassalygo, was an important early lower bound on the size of disjunct matrices.
Theorem 1.5.Suppose there exists ak-disjunct(T×n)-matrix. Then
T≥min
1
2(k+ 1)(k+ 2),n

.(1.15)
There have been many improvements to this lower bound onT, of which we
mention a few examples. Shangguan and Ge [251] improve the constant 1/2 in
22CHAPTER 1. INTRODUCTION TO GROUP TESTING
front of thek 2 term of Theorem 1.5 with the bound
T≥min
(
15 +
√
33
24 (k+ 1) 2,n
)
≈min

0.864(k+ 1) 2,n
	
.(1.16)
Ruszink´ o [236] proves the bound
T≥ 1
8k2 logn
logk (1.17)
fornsufficiently large, provided thatkgrows slower than √n,1 while F¨ uredi
[122] proves a similar bound with 1/8 improved to 1/4. In the sparse regimek=
Θ(nα) withα∈(0,1), we have logn/logk→1/α, which means that (1.17) and
F¨ uredi’s improvement give improved constants compared to Theorem 1.5 and
(1.16) for sufficiently smallα. In the very sparse regimek=O(1), (1.17) gives
roughly a lognfactor improvement, which D’yachkov and Rykov [100] improve
further, replacing 1/8 by a complicated expression that is approximately 1/2
for large (but constant) values ofk.
In the case thatk= Θ(n α) withα>1/2, the boundT≥nof Theorem 1.5
can be achieved by the identity matrix (that is, testing each item individually),
and the resulting number of testsT=nis optimal.
Forα <1/2, theT≥Ω(k 2) lower bound of Theorem 1.5 (and the related
results) are complemented by achievability results of the formT≤O(k 2 logn),
which is only a logarithmic factor larger. For example, considering a Bernoulli
random design withp= 1/(k+ 1), one can prove the existence of ak-disjunct
(T×n)-matrix with
T≤(1 +δ)e(k+ 1) ln

(k+ 1)
 n
k+ 1

∼(1 +δ)e(k+ 1) 2 lnn
for anyδ >0 [97, Theorem 8.1.3]. (Du and Hwang [97, Section 8.1] attribute this
result to unpublished work by Busschbach [48].) Kautz and Singleton [179] give
a number of constructions of separable and disjunct matrices, notably including
a construction based on Reed–Solomon codes that we discuss further in Section
5.7. Porat and Rothschild [231] give a construction withT=O(k 2 logn) using
linear codes.
Note that in the sparse regime, the lower bound from Theorem 1.5 is on the
order of min{Ω(k2),n}which is much larger than the orderklognof the count-
ing bound. Thus, nonadaptive zero-error group testing has rate 0 according to
Definition 1.7.
Theorem 1.6.The capacity of nonadaptive group testing with the zero-error
criterion isC 0 = 0in the case thatk= Θ(n α)withα∈(0,1). In other words,
the number of tests must have a growth rate strictly higher thanklog n
k .
Remark1.4.In the context of zero-error communication [252], a memoryless
channel having a zero-error capacity of zero is a very negative result, as it
implies that not even two distinct codewords can be distinguished with zero error
probability. We emphasize that when it comes to group testing, the picture is
1The first line of the proof in [236] assumesk 2 dividesn; this is not true whenk 2 > n, but
can be accommodated with a negligible increase innifkgrows slower than √n.
1.7. APPLICATIONS OF GROUP TESTING23
very different: A result stating thatC 0 = 0 by no means implies that attaining
zero error probability is a hopeless task; rather, it simply indicates that it is
insufficient to takeO
 
klog n
k

tests. As discussed above, there is an extensive
amount of literature establishing highly valuable results in which the number of
tests isO(k 2 logn) or similar.
In contrast with Theorem 1.6, in Chapters 2 and 4 of this survey, we will see
that under the small-error criterion (i.e., asymptotically vanishing but nonzero
error probability), we can achieve nonzero rates for allα∈[0,1), and can even
attain a rate of 1 forα∈[0,0.409]. This demonstrates the significant savings
in the number of tests permitted by allowing a small nonzero error probability.
An interesting point of view is provided by Gilbertet al.[136], who argue
that zero-error group testing can be viewed as corresponding to an adversarial
model on the defective set; specifically, the adversary selectsKas a function of
Xin order to make the decoder fail. Building on this viewpoint, [136] gives a
range of models where the adversary’s choice is limited by computation or other
factors, effectively interpolating between the zero-error and small-error models.
1.7 Applications of group testing
Although group testing was first formulated in terms of testing for syphilis
[96], it has been abstracted into a combinatorial and algorithmic problem, and
subsequently been applied in many contexts. The early paper of Sobel and Groll
[258] lists some basic applications to unit testing in industrial processes, such as
the detection of faulty containers, capacitors, or Christmas tree lights. Indeed,
solutions based on group testing have been proposed more recently for quality
control in other manufacturing contexts, such as integrated circuits [172] and
molecular electronics [263] (though the latter paper studies a scenario closer to
the linear model discussed in Section 5.10).
We review some additional applications here; this list is certainly not ex-
haustive, and is only intended to give a flavour of the wide range of contexts in
which group testing has been applied. Many of these applications motivate our
focus on nonadaptive algorithms. This is because in many settings, adaptive
algorithms are impractical, and it is preferable to fix the test design in advance
– for example, to allow a large number of tests to be run in parallel.
Medical testing
As discussed at the start of this chapter, medical testing was the very first
proposed application of group testing, where expensive tests could be reduced
when testing for a rare disease – in that case, syphilis.
This idea re-emerged more recently in the Covid-19 pandemic, when many
researchers and public figures proposed the use of pooled testing. This was
particularly relevant at the beginning of the pandemic, when PCR tests were
scarce and expensive, so there would be a large benefit to being able to make use
of the test savings inherent in the group testing paradigm. Since group testing
is most beneficial when infection is rare, it was most suited to the screening of
asymptomatic people – if an individual is displaying symptoms, they may be
sufficiently likely to be infected that group testing would not be beneficial.
24CHAPTER 1. INTRODUCTION TO GROUP TESTING
Aldridge and Ellis [17] wrote a survey on group testing and the pandemic,
covering several relevant mathematical models and giving an account of how
and where group testing was actually used. We only give a brief overview here,
and direct readers to [17] for more details.
The most widely used method in practice was Dorfman’s algorithm (see
Sections 1.5 and 5.2). This was preferred for several reasons including the
simplicity of the method, the requirement of only two stages of testing (which
is important since PCR testing is quite slow), and the fact that this approach is
quite effective in the ‘uncommon but not super-rare’ region where the prevalence
is roughly between 2% and 25% (see Section 5.5.2 and [17] for details). One
prominent and well documented use of Dorfman’s algorithm was testing students
at the University of Cambridge, UK, where pools were ‘social bubbles’, typically
of size around 8 – see [17, Section 6.2] for a more detailed description of this
and other well publicized uses of group testing during the pandemic.
Ultimately, group testing was not used particularly extensively for Covid-19,
despite being championed by prominent figures in the media (see, for example,
[46]). As time went on, rapid at-home lateral flow tests became widely and
cheaply available. Although these are less effective than PCR tests in detecting
the presence of disease, the benefits of having fast and easy-to-obtain results
ultimately proved to be more important. Naturally, taking a quick test at home
is not conducive to the sort of organised process needed to carry out group
testing.
Nevertheless, there was an understandable explosion in interest in the topic
of group testing. Much of this seemingly amounted to the rediscovery of known
ideas. On the other hand, there were also plenty of innovations in the mathe-
matics of group testing too. Several of the additions to the second edition of
this survey are thanks to this upsurge in interest in the topic that occurred
at that time. In particular, some of the new research directions that arose
are specifically motivated by applications in testing for pandemic diseases, such
as community-aware group testing (see Section 5.6.2) and certain non-binary
testing models (see Section 5.10).
Biology
With medicine and biology being closely related, it is no surprise that group
testing has found many uses in biology in addition to medical testing, as sum-
marized, for example, in [30, 57, 98]. We list some examples as follows:
DNA testingAs described in [97, Chapter 9], [250] and [255], modern se-
quencing methods search for particular subsequences of a genome in relatively
short fragments of DNA. Samples from individuals can easily be mixed, and ac-
cordingly, group testing can lead to significant reductions in the number of tests
required to isolate individuals with rare genetic conditions – see, for example,
[30, 85, 140]. In this context, it is typical to use nonadaptive methods (as in
[98, 112, 111, 205, 255]), since it is preferable not to stop the testing machines in
order to rearrange the sequencing strategy. Furthermore, the physical design of
modern DNA testing plates means that it can often be desirable to use exactly
T= 96 tests (see [111]). Macula [205] describes combinatorial constructions
that are robust to errors in testing.
1.7. APPLICATIONS OF GROUP TESTING25
Counting defective itemsOften we do not need to estimate the defective set
itself, but rather wish to efficiently estimate the proportion of defective items.
This may be because we have no need to distinguish individuals (for example,
when dealing with insects [270, 282]), or wish to preserve confidentiality of
individuals (for example, monitoring prevalence of diseases). References [54,
257, 265] were early works showing that group testing offers an efficient way to
estimate the proportion of defectives, particularly when defectivity is rare. This
testing paradigm continues to be used in recent medical research, where pooling
can provide significant reductions in the cost of DNA testing – see for example
[181], [271].
Specific applications are found in works such as [177, 265, 270, 282], in which
the proportion of insects carrying a disease is estimated; and in [130, 275],
in which the proportion of the population with HIV/AIDS is estimated while
preserving individual privacy. Many of these protocols require nonadaptive
testing, since tests may be time-consuming – for example, one may need to
place a group of possibly infected insects with a plant, and wait to see if the
plant becomes infected. We review the question of counting defectives using
group testing in more detail in Section 5.3.
Other biological applicationsWe briefly remark that group testing has
also been used in many other biological contexts – see [98, Section 1.3] for a
review. For example, this includes the design of protein–protein interaction ex-
periments [222], high-throughput drug screening [173], catalyst discovery [237],
and efficient learning of Immune–Defective graphs in drug design [127].
Commmunication and signal processing
Group testing has been applied in a number of communications scenarios, in-
cluding the following:
Multiple access channelsWe refer to a channel where several users can
communicate with a single receiver as amultiple access channel. Wolf [290]
describes how this can be formulated in terms of group testing: At any one
time, a small subset of users (active users) will have messages to transmit, and
correspond to defective items in this context. Hayes [151] introduced adaptive
protocols based on group testing to schedule transmissions, which were further
developed by many authors (see [290] for a review). In fact, Bergeret al.[33]
argue for the consideration of a ternary group testing problem with outcomes
‘idle’, ‘success’, and ‘collision’, corresponding to no user, one user, or multi-
ple users broadcasting simultaneously, and develop an adaptive transmission
protocol.
These adaptive group testing protocols for multiple access channels are com-
plemented by corresponding nonadaptive protocols developed in works such as
[184] (using random designs) and [93] (using designs based on superimposed
code constructions). Variants of these schemes were further developed in works
such as [94], [291] and [292]. The paper [278] uses a similar argument for the
related problem of Code-Division Multiple Access (CDMA), where decoding can
be performed for a group of users simultaneously transmitting from constella-
tions of possible points. See also [162, 161] for further group testing approaches
in short-packet or energy-limited random access settings.
26CHAPTER 1. INTRODUCTION TO GROUP TESTING
Along similar lines as some of the preceding works, in [73] a group testing
based method is proposed for data collection over multiple-access wireless sensor
networks. See also [74] for analogous methods in the context of sampling sparse
time series signals.
Cognitive radiosA related communication scenario is that of cognitive radio
networks, where ‘secondary users’ can opportunistically transmit on frequency
bands which are unoccupied by primary users. We can scan combinations of
several bands at the same time and detect if any signal is being transmitted
across any of them, and use procedures based on group testing to determine
which bands are unoccupied – see for example [23, 254].
Network tomography and anomaly discoveryGroup testing has been
used to perform network tomography; that is, to detect faults in a computer
network only using certain end-to-end measurements. In this scenario, users
send a packet from one machine to another, and check whether it successfully
arrives. For example, we can view the edges of the network as corresponding to
items, with items in a test corresponding to the collection of edges along which
the packet travelled. If (and only if) a packet arrives safely, we know that no
edge on that route is faulty (no item is defective), which precisely corresponds
to the OR operation of the standard noiseless group testing model.
As described in several works including [66, 150, 202, 294], and discussed
briefly in Section 5.8, this leads to a scenario where arbitrary choices of tests
cannot be taken, since each test must correspond to a connected path in the
graph topology. This motivates the study of graph-constrained group testing,
which is a problem of interest in its own right.
Goodrich and Hirschberg [145] describes how an adaptive algorithm for
ternary group testing can be used to find faulty sensors in networks, and a non-
adaptive algorithm (combining group testing with Kalman filters) is described
in [199].
Information technology
The discrete nature of the group testing problem makes it particularly useful
for various problems in computing, such as the following:
Data storage and compressionKautz and Singleton [179] describe early
applications of superimposed coding strategies to efficiently searching punch
cards and properties of core memories. Hong and Ladner [153] describe an
adaptive data compression algorithm for images, based on the wavelet coeffi-
cients. In particular, they show that the standard Golomb algorithm for data
compression is equivalent to Hwang’s group testing algorithm [158] (see Section
1.5). These ideas have been extended, for example in [154] in the context of
compressing correlated data from sensor networks, using ideas related to the
multiple access channel described above. See also [4] for a group testing prob-
lem with runlength constraints based on applications in topological DNA-based
data storage.
1.7. APPLICATIONS OF GROUP TESTING27
CybersecurityAn important cybersecurity problem is to efficiently deter-
mine which computer files have changed, based on a collection of hashes of
various combinations of files (this is sometimes referred to as the ‘file compar-
ison problem’). Here the modified files correspond to defective items, with the
combined hash acting as a testing pool. References [144] and [207] demonstrate
methods to solve this problem using nonadaptive procedures based on group
testing.
Khattabet al.[182] and Xuanet al.[295] describe how group testing can
be used to detect denial-of-service attacks, by dividing the server into a number
of virtual servers (each corresponding to a test), observing which ones receive
large amounts of traffic (interpreted as a positive test) and hence deducing which
users are providing the greatest amount of traffic.
Database systemsIn order to manage databases efficiently, it can be use-
ful to classify items as ‘hot’ (in high demand), corresponding to defectivity in
group testing language. Cormode and Muthukrishnan [82] show that this can
be achieved using both adaptive and nonadaptive group testing, even in the
presence of noise. A related application is given in [283], which considers the
problem of identifying ‘heavy hitters’ (high-traffic flows) in Internet traffic, and
provides a solution using a linear version of group testing, in which each test
gives the number of defective items in the testing pool (see Section 5.10).
Bloom filtersABloom filter[36] is a data structure that allows one to test
if a given item is in a special set of distinguished items extremely quickly, with
no possibility of false negatives and very rare false positives.
The Bloom filter usesLhash functions, each of which maps items to{1,2,...,T}.
For each of the items in the distinguished set, one sets up the Bloom filter by
hashing the item using each of theLhash functions, and setting the correspond-
ing bits in aT-bit array to1. (If the bit is already set to1, it is left as1.) To
test if another item is in the distinguished set, one hashes the new item with
each of theLhash functions and looks up the corresponding bits in the array.
If any of the bits are set to0, the item is not in the distinguished set; while if
the bits are all set1, one assumes the item is in the set, although there is some
chance of a false positive.
The problem of deciding how many hash functionsLto use, and how large
the size of the arrayTis, essentially amounts to a group testing problem. For
instance, for suitably-chosenL, the analysis is almost identical to that of the
COMP algorithm with a near-constant tests-per-item design (see Section 2.7).
We also mention that [297] makes a connection between Bloom filters and coding
over anORmultiple-access channel, which is also closely related to group testing.
Machine learning
Group testing has played a role in several aspects of machine learning, including
the following.
Classification and clusteringTwo of the most fundamental problems in
machine learning are classification (a supervised problem) and clustering (an
unsupervised problem). Ubaru and Mazumdar [277] use group testing to solve
28CHAPTER 1. INTRODUCTION TO GROUP TESTING
classification problems with many labels using combinations of binary problems,
each corresponding to theORof relatively fewer labels. This was further refined
by Ubaruet al.[276] using methods based on hierarchical partitioning and data-
dependent grouping. Turning to clustering problems, a ‘near neighbour’ search
technique was proposed by Engels, Coleman, and Shrivastava [108] based on
treating near neighbours as positives (defectives), non-neighbours as negatives
(nondefectives), and using hashing techniques to test groups of points and re-
turn, within some accuracy, whether any point in that group is a near neighbour
of a particular query point. A different clustering problem was studied by Black
et al.[34] in which queries can be performed on subsets, with the result re-
turning how many clusters intersect the subset. This was tackled using group
testing techniques and shown to require significantly fewer queries compared to
previously-studied ‘same-cluster queries’.
Neural networksIn recent years, the field of machine learning has drasti-
cally evolved following the rise of deep neural networks, and group testing has
continued to play a role in certain aspects. With the goal of detecting certain
objects in images, Liang and Zou [195], ‘pool’ multiple images (by averaging
pixels or aggregating features) and then pass them through a neural network,
with group testing methods then used for detection. Pooling sizes up to at least
16 are shown to be feasible experimentally. A counterpart based on non-binary
test results was proposed by Ghosh, Saxena, and Rajwade [135], who further
used binary group testing for outlier detection based on testing pools of data
points.
Learning interpretable rulesIn the work of Malioutovet al.[210], group
testing is used to learn classification rules that are interpretable by practition-
ers. For example, in medicine we may wish to develop a rule based on training
data that can diagnose a condition or identify high-risk groups from a num-
ber of pieces of measured medical data (features). However, standard machine
learning approaches such as support vector machines or neural networks can
lead to classification rules that are complex, opaque, and hard to interpret for
a clinician. For reasons of simplicity, it can be preferable to use suboptimal
classification rules based on a small collection ofANDclauses or a small collec-
tion ofORclauses. In [210], the authors show how such rules can be obtained
using a relaxed noisy linear programming formulation of group testing (to be
described in Section 3.2). The work of Emad, Varshney, and Malioutov [107]
further studied such problems under a semi-quantitative group testing model,
in which the outcomes are non-binary.
Distributed learningJain, Cardone, and Mohajer [167] considered distributed
computation of matrix–vector products, and proposed group testing methods
to identify which machines are ‘attacked’ (that is, these machines output ad-
versarially chosen unreliable answers). A similar kind of problem of identifying
malicious clients using group testing was studied by Xhemrishiet al.[293], in
the context of federated learning.
APPENDIX: COMPARISON OF PRIORS29
Other theoretical domains
Finally, group testing has been applied to a number of theoretical problems in
statistics, data science, and theoretical computer science.
Search problemsDu and Hwang [97, Part IV] give an extensive review of
applications of group testing to a variety of search problems, including the fa-
mous problem of finding a counterfeit coin and membership problems. This
can be seen as a generalization of group testing; a significant early contribution
to establish order-optimal performance was made by Erd˝ os and R´ enyi [110].
Further search problems related to group testing include locating targets via re-
gion queries [176], ‘20 questions’ problems [298, Section 6.2], and finding similar
items in high-dimensional spaces [256].
Sparse inference and learningGilbert, Iwen and Strauss [137] discuss the
relationship between group testing and compressed sensing, and show that group
testing can be used in a variety of sparse inference problems, including streaming
algorithms and learning sparse linear functions. Malioutov and Varshney [209]
build on this idea by showing how group testing can be used to perform binary
classification of objects, and Emad and Milenkovic [104] develop a framework
for testing arrivals with decreasing defectivity probability.
Theoretical computer scienceGroup testing has been applied to classical
problems in theoretical computer science, including pattern matching [72, 165,
206] and the estimation of high degree vertices in hidden bipartite graphs [288].
In addition, generalizations of the group testing problem are studied in this
community in their own right, including the ‘k-junta problem’ (see for example
[35, 45, 221]). A binary functionfis referred to as ak-junta if it depends on
at mostkof its inputs, and we wish to investigate this property using a limited
number of input–output pairs (x,f(x)).
It is worth noting thattestingk-juntas only requires determining whether a
givenfhas this property or is far from having this property [35], which is dis-
tinct fromlearningk-juntas, i.e., either determining thekinputs thatfdepends
on or estimatingfitself. Further studies of thek-junta problem vary accord-
ing to whether the inputsxare chosen by the tester (‘membership queries’)
[44], uniformly at random by nature [221], or according to some quantum state
[19, 26]. In view of the above description, group testing with a combinatorial
prior is closely related to thek-junta learning problem, but with the additional
knowledge that the function is anORof thekinputs.
Appendix: Comparison of combinatorial and
i.i.d. priors
In this technical appendix, we discuss the relationship between combinatorial
and i.i.d. priors for the defective set. We tend to use the combinatorial prior
throughout this survey, so new readers can safely skip this appendix on first
reading.
Recall the two related prior distributions on the defective setK:
30CHAPTER 1. INTRODUCTION TO GROUP TESTING
•Under thecombinatorial prior, there are exactlykdefective items, and
the defective setKis uniformly random over the
 n
k

possible subsets of
that size.
•Under thei.i.d. prior, each item is defective independently with a given
probabilityq∈(0,1), and hence the number of defectivesk=|K|is
distributed ask∼Binomial(n,q), withE(k) =nq. For brevity, we adopt
the notation k=nq.
Intuitively, when the (average) number of defectives is large, one should
expect the combinatorial prior with parameterkto behave similarly to the
i.i.d. prior with a matching choice of k, since in the latter case we havek=
k(1+o(1)) with high probability due to standard binomial concentration bounds.
To formalize this intuition, first consider the definition rate := 1
T log2
 n
k

for
the combinatorial prior (see Definition 1.7), along with the following analogous
definition for the i.i.d. prior:
rate := nh(q)
T ,(1.18)
whereh(q) =−qlog 2q−(1−q) log 2 (1−q) is the binary entropy function.
Using standard estimates of the binomial coefficient [22, Sec. 4.7], the former
is asymptotically equivalent to 1
Tnh(k/n), which matches 1
Tnh(q) = 1
Tnh(k/n)
withkin place of k. Consistent with our focus in this monograph, in this section
we focus on scaling laws of the formk→∞andk=o(n) (or similarly with k
in place ofk), in which case the preceding rates are asymptotically equivalent
to 1
Tklog 2
n
k and 1
Tklog 2
n
k . With some minor modifications, the arguments
that we present below also permit extensions to the linear regimek= Θ(n)
(discussed in Section 5.10).
Having established that the rate expressions asymptotically coincide, further
arguments are needed to transfer achievability and converse results from one
prior to the other. In the following, we present two results for this purpose. In
both results, any statement on the existence or non-existence of a decoding rule
may refer to decoders that have perfect knowledge of the number of defectives
k, or only partial knowledge (such as high-probability bounds), or no knowledge
at all – but the assumed decoder knowledge must remain consistent throughout
the entire theorem. Note that having exact knowledge ofkin the i.i.d. setting
is a particularly unrealistic assumption, since in that setting it is a random
quantity. We further discuss the issue of known vs. unknownkat the end of
the section.
From combinatorial to i.i.d.
The following theorem describes how to transfer achievability bounds from the
combinatorial prior to the i.i.d. prior.
Theorem 1.7.Consider a sequence of (possibly randomized or adaptive) test
designsX(indexed byn) attainingP(err)→0under the combinatorial prior
wheneverk=k 0(1 +o(1))for some nominal number of defectivesk 0, with
k0 → ∞andk 0 =o(n)asn→ ∞. Then the sameXand decoding rule
also attainsP(err)→0under the i.i.d. prior withq=k 0/n(i.e., k=k 0).
In particular, if a given rateR 0 is achievable under the combinatorial prior
APPENDIX: COMPARISON OF PRIORS31
wheneverk=k 0(1 +o(1)), then it is also achievable under the i.i.d. prior with
k=k 0.
Proof.Since k=k 0 grows unbounded asn→∞by assumption, we have by
standard binomial concentration thatk= k(1+o(1)) =k 0(1+o(1)) with proba-
bility approaching one under the i.i.d. prior. LettingIdenote the corresponding
set of ‘typical’kvalues, we deduce that
P(err) =
X
k
P(k)P(err|k) (1.19)
≤
X
k∈I
P(k)P(err|k) +P(k /∈I) (1.20)
→0,(1.21)
sinceP(err|k)→0 for allk∈Iby assumption, and we established thatP(k /∈
I)→0. This establishes the first claim. The additional claim on the rate
follows since, as discussed above (and usingk=k 0(1 +o(1))), the achievable
rates for both priors are asymptotically equivalent to 1
Tk0 log2
n
k0
.
Analogously, the following theorem describes how to transfer converse bounds
from the combinatorial prior to the i.i.d. prior.
Theorem 1.8.FixR 0 >0, and suppose that under the combinatorial prior with
some sequence of defective set sizesk=k 0 (indexed byn) satisfyingk 0→∞and
k0 =o(n), there does not exist any algorithm achieving rateR 0. Then for any
arbitrarily small constantϵ>0, under the the i.i.d. prior withq=k 0(1 +ϵ)/n,
there does not exist any algorithm achieving rateR 0(1 +ϵ).
Proof.Sincek 0→∞and the average number of defectives under the i.i.d. prior
is k=k 0(1 +ϵ), we deduce via binomial concentration thatk∈[k 0,k 0(1 + 2ϵ)]
with probability approaching one. Forkoutside this range, any contribution to
the overall error probability is asymptotically negligible.
On the other hand, whenkdoes fall in this range, we can consider a genie
argument in which a uniformly random subset ofk 1 =k−k 0 defectives is
revealed to the decoder. The decoder is then left to identifyk 0 defectives out
ofn 1 =n−k 1 items. Hence, the problem is reduced to the combinatorial prior
with slightly fewer items.
The conditionk≤k 0(1+2ϵ) implies thatk 1≤2ϵk 0 and hencen 1≥n−2ϵk 0,
which behaves asn(1−o(1)) sincek 0 =o(n). As discussed at the start of this
section, in the sparse regime, the asymptotic rate is equal to the asymptotic
value of 1
Tklog 2
n
k (combinatorial prior) or 1
Tklog 2
n
k (i.i.d. prior), and we ob-
serve that (i) replacingnbyn(1−o(1)) does not impact the asymptotic rate;
and (ii) replacing k=k 0(1 +ϵ) byk 0 reduces the rate by a factor of 1/(1 +ϵ)
asymptotically.
We conclude the proof via a contradiction argument: IfR 0(1 +ϵ) were
achievable withq=k 0(1 +ϵ)/nunder the i.i.d. prior, the preceding reduction
would imply thatR 0 is achievable withk=k 0 under the combinatorial prior,
which was assumed to be impossible.
Unlike Theorem 1.7, this result involves scaling the (average) number of
defectives and the rate by 1 +ϵ. However, sinceϵis arbitrarily small, one can
32CHAPTER 1. INTRODUCTION TO GROUP TESTING
think of this scaling as being negligible. In fact, for all achievability and converse
results that we are aware of, in the case thatk= Θ(n α) for someα∈(0,1), the
asymptotic rate depends only onαand not on the implied constant in the Θ(·)
notation.
From i.i.d. to combinatorial
It is also of interest to transfer results in the opposite direction, i.e., to infer
achievability or converse bounds for the combinatorial prior based on those for
the i.i.d. prior. For this purpose, the contrapositive statements of Theorems 1.7
and 1.8 read as follows:
•(Theorem 1.7) If there does not exist any test design and decoder achieving
P(err)→0 under the i.i.d. prior whenq=k 0/nwithk 0 → ∞and
k0 =o(n), then there also does not exist any test design and decoder that
simultaneously achievesP(err)→0 under the combinatorial prior for all
ksuch thatk=k 0(1 +o(1)).
•(Theorem 1.8) Again assumingk 0→∞andk 0 =o(n), if the rateR 0 is
achievable withq=k 0/nunder the i.i.d. prior, then for arbitrarily small
ϵ >0 the rateR 0/(1 +ϵ) is achievable withk=k 0/(1 +ϵ) under the
combinatorial prior.
It is worth noting that the former of these statements does not directly provide
a converse result for any particular value ofk, but rather, only does so for the
case that severalkmust be handled simultaneously.
Knowledge of the number of defective items
A somewhat more elusive challenge is to transfer results from the case that the
decoder knows the number of defective itemskto the case that it does not
(or the case that it only knows bounds onk), and vice versa. In particular,
it is sometimes convenient to prove achievability results for the case thatkis
known exactly (see for example Chapter 4), and to prove converse results for
the case thatkis unknown (see for example Section 2.2). This potentially poses
a ‘gap’ in the achievability and converse bounds even when the associated rates
coincide.
While we are not aware of any completely general results allowing one to
close such a gap, we highlight a number of techniques that have addressed this
issue and provided evidence that the best possible rates tend to be the same
regardless of whetherkis known exactly or to within a multiplicative 1 +o(1)
factor (as is the case under the i.i.d. prior).
•In Section 4.3, we will describe an approach that combines the failure
of two algorithms called SSS (Section 2.2) and COMP (Section 2.3) to
deduce the failure of an arbitrary algorithm. Neither of these algorithms
has knowledge ofk. It is argued that if both of them fail, then there must
exist someK′̸=Kwith|K ′|=|K|=ksuch thatK ′ is also consistent with
the outcomes. Since the decoder cannot do better than randomly guess
between the two (or more) consistent size-ksets even whenkis known,
we deduce thatP(err) cannot tend to zero.
APPENDIX: COMPARISON OF PRIORS33
•In Section 4.5.1, we will outline a converse technique based onmasking
events, in which many items appear only in tests containing other items
that are defective, leading to decoding errors. Such techniques are more
naturally suited to the i.i.d. prior, but a simple trick can be used under the
combinatorial prior. Lettingkbe the number of defectives in the latter,
one considers the i.i.d. prior with ¯kslightly belowk, so that the random
number of defectives is belowkwith high probability. Assuming this
high-probability event holds, further items can be marked as defective to
produce exactlykin total, effectively recovering the combinatorial prior.
The idea is then that if masking occurred before marking the extra items
as defective, it certainly still occurs after doing so.
•Certain achievability results that assume exact knowledge ofkhave been
adapted to only require approximate knowledge: for example, [239, Ap-
pendix B], which applies to both noiseless and noisy settings.
Chapter 2
Algorithms for Noiseless
Group Testing
2.1 Summary of algorithms
In this chapter, we discuss decoding algorithms for noiseless nonadaptive group
testing. That is, we are interested in methods for forming the estimate ˆKof
the defective set given the test matrixXand the outcomesy. In addition, we
present performance bounds for these algorithms under random test designs.
We are particularly interested in algorithms that are practical in the follow-
ing two senses:
1. The algorithm does not require knowledge of the number of defectivesk,
other than general imprecise knowledge such as ‘defectivity is rare com-
pared to nondefectivity’, which we implicitly assume throughout.
2. The algorithm is computationally feasible. Specifically, we seek algorithms
that run in time and space polynomial inn, and preferably no worse than
theO(nT) time and space needed to read and store an arbitrary test
designX. Certain algorithms exist having even faster ‘sublinear’ decoding
times, but their discussion is deferred to Section 5.4.
All algorithms in this chapter are practical in the first sense and, with one
exception, in the second sense. The exception is an algorithm called SSS, which
has (worst-case) runtime higher than polynomial and can typically only be run
on small-to-medium size problems, but we include it here as a benchmark. Since
several algorithms are based on approximating the SSS algorithm in faster time,
the analysis of SSS is useful for understanding these other more efficient algo-
rithms.
An important concept that we will use is that of a satisfying set.
Definition 2.1.Consider the noiseless group testing problem withnitems,
using a test designXand producing outcomesy. A setL⊂{1,2,...,n}is
called asatisfying setif
•every positive test contains at least one item fromL;
•no negative test contains any item fromL.
34
2.1. SUMMARY OF ALGORITHMS35
Thus, when performing group testing with test designX, had the true de-
fective set beenL, we would have observed the outcomey. Clearly the true
defective setKis itself a satisfying set.
While we postpone complete definitions of algorithms until the relevant sec-
tions, it is worth providing a quick outline here:
SSS (smallest satisfying set)chooses the smallest satisfying set. This is
based on the idea that the defective setKis a satisfying set, but since
defectivity is rare,Kis likely to be small in size. This algorithm faces
computational challenges whennis large, since it is equivalent to solving
an integer program. See Sections 2.2 and 2.6 for details.
COMP (combinatorial orthogonal matching pursuit)assumes
that each item is defective unless there is a simple proof that it is nonde-
fective, namely, that the item is in at least one negative test. See Section
2.3 for details.
DD (definite defectives)assumes that each item is nondefective unless there
is a certain simple proof that it is defective. See Section 2.4 for details.
SCOMP (sequential COMP)attempts to find the smallest satisfying set by
beginning with the DD set of definite defectives, and sequentially adding
items to the estimated defective set until a satisfying set is obtained. See
Section 2.5 for details.
Linear programming relaxationssolve a relaxed form of the smallest satis-
fying set problem, and use this to attempt to find the smallest satisfying
set. See Section 2.6 for details.
In Chapter 3, we will present additional algorithms that can be specialized to
the noiseless case, particularlybelief propagation(see Section 3.3) andseparate
decoding of items(Section 3.5). Since these algorithms are primarily of interest
for noisy settings, we omit them from this chapter to avoid repetition. We also
briefly mention an additional technique calledspatial coupling; in Chapter 4, we
will discuss that this technique has polynomial runtime and provably achieves
optimal rates. The reason for deferring this approach to Chapter 4 is that
its development is strongly aligned with the theoretical developments of that
chapter, and less so with the algorithmic developments of the present chapter.
We will shortly see numerical evidence that SSS performs the best when
the problem is sufficiently small that it can be implemented, while the SCOMP
and linear programming approaches perform best among the more practical
algorithms. As another means to compare these algorithms, in the upcoming
sections, we will mathematically analyse the rates achieved by these algorithms
in the case that the matrixXhas a Bernoulli design, formally stated as follows.
Definition 2.2.In a Bernoulli design, each item is included in each test in-
dependently at random with some fixed probabilityp=ν/k. In other words,
independently overi∈{1,2,...,n}andt∈{1,2,...,T}, we haveP(X ti =1) =
p=ν/kandP(X ti =0) = 1−p= 1−ν/k.
The parametrizationp=ν/kis chosen because such scaling with constant
νwill be seen to be optimal askgrows large. Intuitively, since the average
number of defectives in each test isν, one should avoid the casesν→0 or
36CHAPTER 2. ALGORITHMS FOR NOISELESS GROUP TESTING
ν→ ∞because they lead to uninformative tests (that is, tests returning a
given outcome with high probability). In Section 2.7, we turn to the near-
constant tests-per-item design, formally introduced in Definition 2.3 below. We
will see that the rates of all of the above algorithms are slightly improved when
used with this alternative design.
Later, in Section 4.3, we will see how the analysis of the SSS and COMP
algorithms allows us to establish algorithm-independent lower bounds on the
number of tests required under Bernoulli and near-constant test-per-item de-
signs.
The result of this chapter are further complemented by those of Chapter
4, which looks further into information-theoretic achievability and converse
bounds. A collective highlight of these two chapters is the following result on
the information-theoretic optimality of some practical algorithms when certain
random test designs are adopted.
Theorem 2.1.Consider group testing withnitems andk= Θ(n α)defectives,
forα >1/2. Suppose that the test design is Bernoulli (with the parameter
pchosen optimally) or constant tests-per-item (with the parameterLchosen
optimally), and suppose that the decoding algorithm is SSS, DD, SCOMP, or
linear programming. Then we can achieve the rate
R∗ =



1
e ln 2
1−α
α ≈0.531 1−α
α for Bernoulli design,
ln 2 1−α
α ≈0.693 1−α
α for near-constant tests-per-item,
which is the optimal rate forα> 1
2 under these random test designs regardless
of the decoding algorithm used. This rate corresponds to a number of tests
satisfying the following for arbitrarily smallη >0:T≥(1+η)eklnk(Bernoulli
design), orT≥(1 +η) 1
ln 2klog 2k(near-constant tests-per-item). 1
Moreover, for the near-constant tests-per-item design, this rate is optimal
forα> 1
2 among all nonadaptive designs.
This and the other main results from this chapter are illustrated in Figure
2.1. Table 2.1 summarizes the algorithms. Whether or not the linear program-
ming approach is guaranteed to give a satisfying set depends on the rule used
to convert the LP solution to an estimate of the defective set – see Section 2.6
for further discussion.
While this chapter focuses on mathematical results, we can also examine the
behaviour of the algorithms presented here in simulations. Figure 2.2 compares
the five algorithms with a Bernoulli design. We see that at least in this example,
SCOMP and linear programming are almost as good as SSS (which would be
infeasible for larger problems), while DD is not much worse, and COMP lags
behind more significantly.
Figure 2.3 compares the performance of the COMP, DD and SSS algorithms
under Bernoulli and near-constant column weight matrix designs. We see that
the near-constant column weight design provides a noticeable improvement for
all three algorithms.
1When stating a rate, we will often also state the corresponding condition toTif it is
sufficiently simple/compact. If the condition onTis more complicated, then we will tend to
only state the rateR, with the understanding that this corresponds toT∼ 1
R klog 2
n
k .
2.2. SSS: SMALLEST SATISFYING SET37
Maximum achievable rate
DD achievable rate
COMP achievable rate
0.25 0.5 0.75 10
0.25
0.5
0.75
1
0
Rate
Bernoulli
Near-constant
column weight
Maximum achievable rate
DD achievable rate
COMP achievable rate
Counting bound
Sparsity parameter α
Figure 2.1: Rates of various algorithms for nonadaptive group testing in the
sparse regime with a Bernoulli design and with a near-constant column weight
design.
Optimal rate Fast SS No false + No false−
SSSα∈[0,1) no yes no no
COMPno yes yes no yes
DDα∈[1/2,1) yes no yes no
SCOMPα∈[1/2,1) yes yes no no
LPα∈[1/2,1) yes depends no no
Table 2.1: Summary of features of algorithms: (i) range ofα(if any) for which
the optimal rate is attained under randomized testing; (ii) whether an efficient
algorithm is known; (iii) whether the output is guaranteed to be a satisfying set;
(iv)-(v) guarantees on the false positives and false negatives in the reconstruc-
tion. The algorithms labelled ‘fast’ can be implemented in timeO(nT), except
possibly LP, whose complexity depends on the solver used (see Section 2.6 for
discussion).
2.2 SSS: Smallest satisfying set
We first discuss the smallest satisfying set (SSS) algorithm. While SSS does not
require knowledge of the number of defectives, it faces computational challenges
whennis large. This is due to the highly combinatorial nature of the algorithm,
which amounts to solving an integer program (see Section 2.6).
Recall from Definition 2.1 that a setLis satisfying if every positive test
contains at least one item fromL, and no negative test contains any item from
L. Moreover, since the true defective setKis satisfying, a smallest satisfying
set definitely exists – though it may not be unique.
The SSS algorithm is based on the idea that sinceKis satisfying, and since
defectivity is rare, it seems plausible thatKshould be the smallest satisfying
38CHAPTER 2. ALGORITHMS FOR NOISELESS GROUP TESTING
Figure 2.2: Empirical performance through simulation of five algorithms with
a Bernoulli design. The parameters aren= 500,k= 10, andp= 1/(k+ 1) =
0.0909. For comparison purposes, we plot the theoretical upper bound onP(suc)
from Theorem 1.1 as ‘counting bd’.
Figure 2.3: Simulation of the COMP, DD and SSS algorithms with Bernoulli and
near-constant column weight designs. The problem parameters aren= 500, and
k= 10. The Bernoulli parameter isp= 1/k= 0.1; the near-constant column
weight parameterLis the nearest integer to (ln 2)T/k≃0.0693T.
2.2. SSS: SMALLEST SATISFYING SET39
1 0 1 0 0 1 0 0
1 1 0 1 0 0 1 1
1 0 0 0 1 0 0 0
0 1 1 0 1 1 0 1
1 0 1 1 0 1 0 1
Figure 2.4: Group testing example. We describe the outcome of the SSS algo-
rithm in Example 2.1, and that of the COMP algorithm in Example 2.2.
set.
Algorithm 2.1.Thesmallest satisfying set(SSS) algorithm is defined by set-
ting ˆKSSS to be the smallest satisfying set, with ties broken arbitrarily if such a
set is not unique.
Example 2.1.In Figure 2.4, we give an example of a group testing matrix and
its outcome. (This example will reappear throughout this chapter.) Since we
have onlyn= 7 items, it is, in this small case, practical to check all 2 7 = 128
subsets. It is not difficult to check that the sets{2,4}and{2,4,7}are the only
satisfying sets. Of these,{2,4}is the smallest satisfying set. Thus, we have
ˆKSSS ={2,4}as the output of the SSS algorithm.
Remark2.1.A naive implementation of SSS requires an exhaustive search overP
k′≤k
 n
k′

putative defective sets, and in general, we do not regard SSS as being
practical in the sense described at the beginning of this chapter. To make this
intuition more precise, we describe a connection to theset coverproblem (see
[279]). Given a universeUand a familySof subsets ofU, the set cover problem
is to find the smallest family of subsets inSsuch that its union is the whole of
U. Suppose that we letUbe the set of positive tests, and the subsets inSlist
the tests in which each possibly defective item is included. (An item is ‘possibly
defective’ if it appears in no negative tests; this definition will play a key role
in the COMP and DD algorithms later.) Then the minimal set cover is exactly
the smallest satisfying set. The set cover problem is known to be NP-hard to
solve [175], or even to verify that a given putative solution is optimal.
While the above-mentioned search time P
k′≤k
 n
k′

may seem overly pes-
simistic, even a more careful analysis suggests high worst-case decoding time in
general. In particular, a significant reduction is attained by replacingnby the
numbern′ of ‘possibly defective’ items as mentioned above. However, for rates
exceeding a certain threshold in
 1
2,ln 2

depending on the test design, it can
be shown we still haven ′ =ω(k) (e.g., see [76, 77, 200]), meaning that even if
kwere known, the number of possibilities
 n′
k

would still scale as exp(ω(k)).
Since SSS is in some sense the ‘best possible’ (albeit possibly impractical)
algorithm, we are interested in upper bounds on its rate. In Section 4.3, we make
the term ‘best possible’ more precise, and show that in fact these upper bounds
are achievable in the information-theoretic sense. In fact, if we switch from the
combinatorial prior to the i.i.d. prior on the defective set (see the Appendix to
40CHAPTER 2. ALGORITHMS FOR NOISELESS GROUP TESTING
Chapter 1), then it can be shown that SSS is equivalent tomaximum a posteriori
(MAP) estimation ofK, and in this case its optimality is immediate.
Theorem 2.2.Consider noiseless nonadaptive group testing with exact recovery
and the small error criterion, withk= Θ(n α)for someα∈(0,1), and using
the SSS algorithm for decoding. The maximum rate achievable by SSS with a
Bernoulli design is bounded above by
R
SSS
Bern≤max
ν>0
min

h(e−ν), ν
eν ln 2
1−α
α

.(2.1)
Here and throughout, we writeh(x) =−xlog 2x−(1−x) log 2(1−x)for the
binary entropy function, measured in bits.
Proof.The first term follows using an argument from [10], and can be seen as a
strengthening of the Fano-based counting bound (1.6) provided by Chanet al.
[52]. The idea is to observe that [52] considers tests for which the probability
of being negative could take any value, so the entropy is upper bounded by
the maximum possible value,H(Y t)≤h(1/2) = 1. However, under Bernoulli
testing with a general value ofp=ν/k, the probability that a test is negative
is (1−ν/k) k≃e−ν, meaning thatH(Y t)≃h(e −ν). The full argument, which
is justified by a typical set argument, is given in [10, Lemma 1].
We explain how the second term follows using a simplified version of the
argument from [16]. We say that a defective item ismaskedif every time it is
tested, it appears in a test with at least one other defective item. We observe
that if somei∈Kis masked then SSS fails, since the setK\{i}forms a smaller
satisfying set. In other words, we know that
P(err)≥P
 [
i∈K
{imasked}
!
.(2.2)
Hence, using the Bonferroni inequalities (see for example [117, Chapter IV,
eq. (5.6)]), we can bound
P(suc)≤1−P
 [
i∈K
{imasked}
!
≤1−
X
i∈K
P({imasked}) +
X
i<j∈K
P({iandjmasked}).(2.3)
Now, any particular defectiveiis masked if all the tests it is included in also
contain one or more other defective items. Using a Bernoulli test design with
item probabilityp=ν/k, the probability that itemiappears in a particular
test with no other defectives isp(1−p) k−1, so the probability it is masked is
(1−p(1−p) k−1)T . Similarly, the probability that itemsiandjare both masked
is (1−2p(1−p) k−1)T , since we need to avoid the two events ‘itemiand no other
defective tested’ and ‘itemjand no other defective tested’, which are disjoint.
Overall, then, in (2.3) we can deduce that
P(suc)≤1−k(1−p(1−p) k−1)T + k2
2 (1−2p(1−p) k−1)T.(2.4)
2.3. COMP: COMBINATORIAL ORTHOGONAL MATCHING PURSUIT41
Sincep=ν/k, we can writer=p(1−p) k−1∼ν/(ke ν). Taking
T=
(1−r) lnk
r

(2.5)
and using the fact that
k(1−r) T− k2
2 (1−2r) T≥

ke−rT/(1−r)

1− k
2 e−rT/(1−r)

(2.6)
(see [16, eq. (41)]), we can deduce that (2.4) is bounded away from 1. Note
that proving this converse for the choice (2.5) also proves it for all larger values
ofT, since additional tests can only lead to fewer masked items.
In Definition 1.8, using the binomial coefficient approximation (1.11), this
means that if the rate exceeds
log2
 n
k

T ∼ (1−α)
ln 2
klnn
T = (1−α)klnn
ln 2
r
(1−r) lnk ∼ ν
eν ln 2
1−α
α ,(2.7)
then the success probability is bounded away from 1.
In Chapter 4, we will survey a result of Scarlett and Cevher [243] showing
that the rate (2.1) is achievable for allα∈(0,1), and deduce that this is the
maximum achievable rate for the Bernoulli design.
2.3 COMP: Combinatorial orthogonal matching
pursuit
The COMP algorithm was the first practical group testing algorithm shown to
provably achieve a nonzero rate for allα<1. The proof was given by Chanet
al.[52, 53].
COMP is based on the simple observation that any item in a negative test
is definitely nondefective. COMP makes the assumption that the other items
are defective.
Algorithm 2.2.TheCOMPalgorithm is defined as follows. We call any item
in a negative testdefinitely nondefective(DND), and call the remaining items
possibly defective(PD). Then the COMP algorithm outputs ˆKCOMP equalling
the set of possible defectives.
The basic idea behind the COMP algorithm has appeared many times under
many names – the papers [179, 213, 52, 53, 57, 201] are just a few examples. The
first appearance of the COMP idea that we are aware of is by Kautz and Single-
ton [179]. We use the name ‘COMP’ (for Combinatorial Orthogonal Matching
Pursuit) following Chanet al.[52], who named it based on connections to a
related compressed sensing algorithm.
Example 2.2.Recall our worked example from Figure 2.4, previously discussed
in Example 2.1. We consider each the negative tests. Test 1 is negative, so items
1, 3, and 6 are definitely nondefective (DND). Test 3 is negative, so items 1 and 5
are definitely nondefective. Putting this together, we deduce that the remaining
items 2, 4, 7 are the possible defective (PD) items, so we choose to mark them
as defective. In other words, ˆKCOMP ={2,4,7}.
42CHAPTER 2. ALGORITHMS FOR NOISELESS GROUP TESTING
The following lemma shows that COMP can be interpreted as finding the
largest satisfying set, in stark contrast with SSS. Here and subsequently, we
writeK c ={1,...,n}\Kfor the items not inK.
Lemma 2.1.The estimate ˆKCOMP generated by the COMP algorithm is a
satisfying set (in the sense of Definition 2.1) and contains no false negatives.
Every satisfying set is a subset of ˆKCOMP, so ˆKCOMP is the unique largest
satisfying set.
Proof.Observe that since every DND item appears in a negative test, and so
must indeed be nondefective, the COMP algorithm outputs no false defectives,
and the true defective set satisfiesK ⊆ ˆKCOMP. Furthermore, since every
positive test contains an element ofK, and hence of ˆKCOMP, we deduce that
ˆKCOMP is a satisfying set.
Fix a satisfying setLand consider itemi̸∈ ˆKCOMP. By constructionimust
be a DND, meaning that it appears in a negative test and therefore (see the
second part of Definition 2.1) cannot be inL. In other words ˆKc
COMP⊆L c, or
reversing the inclusion,L⊆ ˆKCOMP.
In the remainder of this section, we will establish the rate achievable by the
COMP algorithm with a Bernoulli design. These results are due to [52] and
[10]. We should expect that COMP is suboptimal, since it does not make use
of the positive tests.
Theorem 2.3.Consider noiseless nonadaptive group testing with exact recovery
and the small error criterion, withk= Θ(n α)for someα∈(0,1), and using
the COMP algorithm for decoding. With a Bernoulli design and an optimized
parameterp= 1/k, the following rate is achievable:
RCOMP
Bern = 1
e ln 2(1−α)≈0.531(1−α).(2.8)
This rate corresponds to a number of tests satisfying the following for arbitrarily
smallη >0:T≥(1 +η)eklnn.
Proof.For any given nondefective item, the probability that it appears in a
particular test, and that such a test is negative, isp(1−p) k. This follows from
the independence assumption in the Bernoulli design; the test is negative with
probability (1−p) k, and the given item appears with probabilityp. Hence, the
probability that this given nondefective appears in no negative tests is (1−p(1−
p)k)T .
The COMP algorithm succeeds precisely when every nondefective item ap-
pears in a negative test, so the union bound gives
P(err) =P
 [
i∈Kc
{itemidoes not appear in a negative test}
!
≤|K c|
 
1−p(1−p) kT
≤nexp(−Tp(1−p) k).(2.9)
The expressionp(1−p) k is maximized atp= 1/(k+ 1)∼1/k, so we take
p= 1/k(or equivalentlyν= 1), meaning that (1−1/k) k→e−1. Hence, taking
T= (1 +δ)eklnnmeans thatTp(1−p) k∼(1 +δ) lnn.
2.3. COMP: COMBINATORIAL ORTHOGONAL MATCHING PURSUIT43
Using the binomial coefficient approximation (1.11), we have the asymptotic
expression
log2
 n
k

T ∼ (1−α)
ln 2
klnn
T .
Then following Definition 1.8, taking (1 +δ)eklnngives a rate arbitrarily close
to (1−α)/(e ln 2), as desired.
Remark2.2.Using a similar but slightly more involved argument, one can show
that the expressionR COMP
Bern from (2.8) gives the maximum achievable rate when
COMP is used in conjunction with Bernoulli testing. The argument is outlined
as follows for a general parameterp=ν/k.
First, we use binomial concentration to show that the number of negative
testsT 0 is tightly concentrated around its mean, yieldingT 0≃Te −ν. Condi-
tioned onT 0, the probability of a given nondefective failing to be in any negative
test is
q:= (1−p) T0≃exp(−pT 0)≃exp

−ν
kTe−ν

.
The error events are (conditionally) independent for different nondefective items,
so the total error probability is 1−(1−q)n−k. Substitutingq≃exp(−Tνe −ν/k),
applying some simple manipulations, and noticing thatνe −ν is maximized at
ν= 1, we find that
T >(1 +η)eklnn=⇒P(err)→0
T <(1−η)eklnn=⇒P(err)→1,
for arbitrarily smallη >0. This matches the choice ofTin the proof of Theorem
2.3 above. In fact, this argument not only shows that (2.8) the highest achievable
rate, but also that the error probability tends to one when this rate is exceeded.
The preceding argument essentially views COMP as a coupon-collecting al-
gorithm, gradually building up a list of nondefectives using negative tests. We
say that a nondefective item is ‘collected’ if it appears in a negative test. A result
dating back to Laplace (see also [109]) states that in order to collect all coupons
in a set of sizem, it suffices to havemlnmtrials. Here, we need to collect
m=n−k∼ncoupons, and each of the e −1Tnegative tests (assumingν= 1)
contains on averagepn=n/ksuch coupons. Thus, we require n
k e−1T∼nlnn,
which rearranges toT∼eklnn.
Remark2.3.The analysis above also allows us to consider the extent to which
COMP and other algorithms require us to know the exact number of defectives
k. While, for a given test matrix, the decisions taken by COMP do not require
this knowledge, clearly to form a Bernoulli test matrix withp= 1/krequires
the value ofkitself.
However, COMP is reasonably robust to misspecification ofk, in the fol-
lowing sense. Suppose that for a fixedcwe base our matrix on the erroneous
assumption that there are bk=k/cdefectives, and hence usep= 1/ bk=c/k
instead. Repeating the analysis above, we can see that (2.9) behaves like
nexp(−Tce−c/k), so we should useT= (1+δ)klnn/(ce −c) tests, corresponding
to a rate of (1−α)ce −c/ln 2.
In other words, even with a multiplicative error in our estimate ofk, COMP
will achieve a nonzero rate, and if the multiplicative factorcis close to 1,
COMP will achieve a rate close to that given in Theorem 2.3 above. Although
44CHAPTER 2. ALGORITHMS FOR NOISELESS GROUP TESTING
the analysis would be more involved, we anticipate that similar results should
hold for other algorithms. We further discuss the question of uncertainty in the
number of defectives, including how group testing can provide estimates ofk
which are accurate up to a multiplicative factor, in Section 5.3.
2.4 DD: Definite defectives
The DD (Definite Defectives) algorithm, due to Aldridge, Baldassini and John-
son [16], was the first practical group testing algorithm to provably achieve the
optimal rate for Bernoulli designs for a range of values ofα(namely,α≥ 1
2).
Recall the definitions of ‘definite nondefective’ and ‘possible defective’ from
Definition 2.2. DD is based on the observation that if a (necessarily positive)
test contains exactly one possible defective, then that item is in fact definitely
defective.
Algorithm 2.3.Thedefinite defectives(DD) algorithm is defined as follows.
1. We say that any item in a negative test isdefinitely nondefective(DND),
and that any remaining item is apossible defective(PD).
2. If any PD item is the only PD item in a positive test, we call that item
definitely defective(DD).
3. The DD algorithm outputs ˆKDD, the set of definitely defective items.
One justification for DD is the observation that removing nondefective items
from a test does not affect the outcome of the test, so the problem is the same as
if we use the submatrix with columns in PD. In addition, the principle ‘assume
nondefective unless proved otherwise’ (used by DD) should be preferable to
the rule ‘assume defective unless proved otherwise’ (used by COMP) under the
assumption that defectivity is rare. We illustrate this by continuing Example
2.2.
Example 2.3.We present a worked example of DD. From Example 2.2, we
know that items 2, 4, and 7 are the possible defectives (PD). Now consider the
submatrix with the corresponding columns, illustrated in Figure 2.5. Notice
that tests 4 and 5 are positive, and only contain one (possible defective) item,
so we can deduce that items 2 and 4 must be defective. The defectivity status
of item 7 is still unclear, but the DD algorithm marks it as nondefective. Thus,
we have ˆKDD ={2,4}.
Lemma 2.2.The estimate ˆKDD generated by the DD algorithm has no false
positives.
Proof.Since (as in COMP), all DND items are indeed definitely nondefective,
the first stage of DD makes no mistakes. Furthermore, we know that each DD
item is indeed defective, so the second stage of inference in DD is also certainly
correct. Hence, DD can only makes an error in the final step, by marking a
defective item as nondefective. In other words, DD has no false positives, and
ˆKDD⊆K.
2.4. DD: DEFINITE DEFECTIVES45
0 0 0 0
1 1 1 1
0 0 0 0
1 0 0 1
0 1 0 1
Figure 2.5: Example of the DD algorithm. We describe the inferences that
we make in Example 2.3, but give the submatrix of PD columns only, having
marked the DND items discovered in Example 2.2 by COMP as nondefective
(replacing question marks by outlined figures to represent our knowledge).
1 0 1 1
0 1 1 1
1 1 0 1
Figure 2.6: Example of the DD algorithm finding a set which is not satisfying,
to illustrate Remark 2.4. In this case ˆKDD =∅.
Remark2.4.Unlike COMP, the DD algorithm does not necessarily produce an
estimate which is a satisfying set. Figure 2.6 contains a simple example that
illustrates this; since no test is negative, all items are marked as PDs, but no
test contains a single item, so ˆKDD =∅.
However, when DD does produce a satisfying set, it must necessarily be the
smallest satisfying set – that is, ˆKDD = ˆKSSS. We prove this by contradiction
as follows: Assume that ˆKDD is a satisfying set, but not the smallest one.
Then ˆKDD must have more elements than ˆKSSS, meaning there exists some item
i∈ ˆKDD∩( ˆKSSS)c. By the definition of the DD algorithm, this itemiappears
in some non-empty collection of positive tests, say indexed by{t 1,...,t m}⊆
{1,...,T}, with no other element of ˆKDD. However, each such testt j must
also contain some itemi j ∈ ˆKSSS, because ˆKSSS is satisfying. On the other
hand, by definition, no element in ˆKDD∪ ˆKSSS appears in any negative tests, so
{i,i 1,...i m}would all be counted as PD by Stage 1 of the DD algorithm. As
a result, itemiwould never appear as a lone PD item, and so would never be
marked as DD, giving a contradiction.
We now discuss how to calculate the rate of DD under a Bernoulli test design.
It turns out that DD outperforms the COMP rate given in Theorem 2.3 above,
as is immediately deduced from the following result due to [16].
Theorem 2.4.Consider noiseless nonadaptive group testing with exact recovery
and the small error criterion, withk= Θ(n α)for someα∈(0,1), and using
the DD algorithm for decoding. Under a Bernoulli design and an optimized
46CHAPTER 2. ALGORITHMS FOR NOISELESS GROUP TESTING
parameterp= 1
k , the following rate is achievable:
RDD
Bern = 1
e ln 2min

1, 1−α
α

≈0.531 min

1, 1−α
α

.(2.10)
This rate corresponds to a number of tests satisfying the following for arbitrarily
smallη >0:T≥(1 +η) max

ekln n
k,eklnk
	
.
Moreover, forα≥1/2, this matches the maximum achievable rate for SSS
given in Theorem 2.2.
Note that in (2.10), the first minimand dominates forα≤1/2 and the second
minimand dominates forα≥1/2.
The original proof in [16] is rather technical, so we instead outline a proof
that can be inferred from the more recent work of Scarlett and Johnson [246]
(who focused on noisy settings), several ingredients of which came from [16].
The intuition behind the two terms in (2.10) is fairly straightforward:
1. Call a nondefective itemintrudingif it appears only in positive tests, so
cannot be ruled out as definitely nondefective. We first want the number
of ‘intruding’ nondefective items to be small; specifically, to scale likeo(k).
This ensures that almost all of the PD items, 1−o(1) of them, really are
defective. This can be achieved for rates below 1
e ln 2, which is the first
term in (2.10). (In comparison, COMP requires the number of intruding
nondefectives to not merely be small, but to be 0; this requires an even
lower rate.)
2. Second, we want every defective item to be the only PD in at least one
test, which will allow it to be confirmed as definitely defective. When the
o(k) scaling from the first point holds and the rate is below 1
e ln 2
1−α
α , then
this is achieved, with high probability. This is the second term in term
in (2.10). (This threshold is exactly that appearing in the analysis of SSS
in Section 2.2; this is because the masking event therein is very similar to
the event ‘failure to be a unique PD in any test’ when the number of PD
items isk+o(k).)
We proceed to outline how this intuition can be made rigorous, though we still
skip some details and refer the reader to [16, 246] for the full details.
Studying the nondefective items is relatively straightforward, and is similar
to the analysis of COMP. A simple calculation shows that each test outcome
satisfiesP(Y= 0)∼e −ν, so the number of negative testsM 0 satisfiesEM 0∼
Te−ν, and a standard binomial concentration bound shows thatM 0∼Te −ν
with high probability. Conditioned on the number of negative testsM 0 =m 0
for a valuem 0∼Te −ν satisfying this high-probability behaviour, we have for
any nondefective itemi /∈Kthat
P(i∈PD|M 0 =m 0) =

1− ν
k
m0
∼e−Tνe−ν/k,
and hence, the numberGof intruding nondefective items satisfies
E(G|M 0 =m 0)∼(n−k) e −Tνe−ν/k.(2.11)
A simple calculation shows that this scales aso(k) for rates below νe−ν
ln 2 , the
optimal value of which is 1
e ln 2 whenν= 1. Hence, by Markov’s inequality, we
haveG=o(k) with probability tending to one.
2.4. DD: DEFINITE DEFECTIVES47
Studying the defective items is somewhat more complicated, partly because
conditioning onGis difficult given thatGis not independent of the placements
of defective items. Before attempting such conditioning, we consider a fixed
defective itemi∈Kand an associated triplet (M 0,Mi,M other) corresponding
to a useful partitioning of theTtests:M 0 is the number of negative tests,M i
is the number of tests containing itemibut no other defectives, andM other =
T−M 0−Mi counts the remaining tests. Due to the i.i.d. nature of the Bernoulli
design, this triplet has a multinomial distribution:
(M0,Mi,M other)∼Multinomial(T;p 0,pi,p other),
wherep 0∼e−ν,p i∼ νe−ν
k , andp other = 1−p 0−pi. These parameters come
from the above calculation forM 0 and a similar calculation forM i
We now consider conditioning on a fixed pair (G,M 0) = (g,m 0) satisfying
m0∼Te −ν andg=o(k); recall that we showed above that these properties
hold with high probability. Under such conditioning, we consider ‘splitting’ the
Mi tests in the second category into a further pair (Li,Mi−Li), whereLi counts
the tests in whichiis the only PD item, andM i−Li counts the tests containing
bothiand a nondefective item from PD. Note that the DD algorithm succeeds
if and only ifL i >0 for alli∈K.
While the effect of the above-mentioned conditioning on (G,M 0) may ap-
pear to be complicated, a simple analysis of the conditional probability can be
performed (see [246, Lemma 2], which is related to [16, Lemma C.2]) to deduce
that
(Li,Mi−Li,M other)|{G=g,M 0 =m 0}
∼Multinomial

T−m 0; p′
i
1−p 0
, p′′
i
1−p 0
, pother
1−p 0

,
wherep′
i =p i(1−ψ) andp ′′
i =ψwithψbeing the conditional probability that
at least one nondefective item from PD is included in a given test. A simple
calculation shows that the conditiong=o(k) impliesψ=o(1), which in turn
impliesp′
i∼p i. Combining this withp 0∼e−ν,p i∼ νe−ν
k , andm 0∼Te −ν, it
follows that the conditional distribution ofLi is roughly binomial withT(1−e−ν)
trials and probability parameter νe−ν/k
1−e−ν . This implies that the eventL i = 0 has
probability roughly

1− νe−ν/k
1−e −ν
T(1−e−ν)
∼exp

− T
kνe−ν

.
Hence, by a union bound over thekdefectives, the conditional probability of
any defective item satisfyingL i = 0 (thus causing DD to fail) is roughly
P(error|G=g,M 0 =m 0)∼kexp

− T
kνe−ν

.
A simple calculation shows that this approaches 0 asn→∞for rates below
νe−ν
ln 2
1−α
α = 1
e ln 2
1−α
α ,
where the right-hand side has taken the optimalν= 1. This completes the
argument.
48CHAPTER 2. ALGORITHMS FOR NOISELESS GROUP TESTING
Remark2.5.We conclude this section with the following remarks.
1. As shown in [246], Theorem 2.4 provides the best possible achievable rate
for DD with Bernoulli testing, so any further improvements require chang-
ing either the detection algorithm or the test design, not just the analysis.
Forα≥1/2, such a claim is trivially deduced from an observation that
no algorithm can do better under Bernoulli testing. Forα <1/2, taking
C= max{α,1−α}−ϵ= 1−α−ϵin (2.11) givesE(G)≫k, which
leads to a large number of true defectives getting ‘drowned out’ by the
nondefectives that are marked as possible defectives.
2. With the exception of SSS, the DD algorithm achieves the highest rate
under the Bernoulli test design among the simple algorithms surveyed in
this chapter. This will also be the case under the improved near-constant
tests-per-item design in Section 2.7. For the Bernoulli design, we note
that an algorithm calledseparate decoding of itemsachieves slightly higher
rates whenθis very small, in particular approaching ln 2≃0.693 asθ→0.
Since this algorithm is primarily targeted at noisy settings, we defer its
description to Section 3.5.
2.5 SCOMP: Sequential COMP
SCOMP is an algorithm due to Aldridge, Baldassini, and Johnson [16] that
builds a satisfying set by starting from the set of definite defectives (DD) and
sequentially adding new items until a satisfying set is reached. The name comes
from ‘Sequential COMP’, as it can be viewed as a sequential version of the
COMP algorithm.
Algorithm 2.4.TheSCOMPalgorithm is defined as follows.
1. Initialize ˆKas the estimate ˆKDD produced by the DD algorithm (Algo-
rithm 2.3), and declare any definitely nondefective items (items appearing
in a negative test) to be nondefective. The other possible defectives are
not yet declared either way.
2. Any positive test is calledunexplainedif it does not contain any items
from ˆK. Add to ˆKthe possible defective not in ˆKthat appears in the
most unexplained tests, and mark the corresponding tests as no longer
unexplained. (Ties may be broken arbitrarily.)
3. Repeat step 2 until no tests remain unexplained. The estimate of the
defective set is ˆK.
Note that a satisfying set leaves no unexplained tests, and any set containing
no definite nondefectives and leaving no unexplained tests is satisfying. Note
also that the set of all possible defectives is satisfying, so the SCOMP algorithm
does indeed terminate.
The following result [11] is relatively straightforward to prove.
Theorem 2.5.For any given test design, any rate achievable by DD is also
achievable by SCOMP. In particular, with a Bernoulli design and optimal choice
of the parameterp, SCOMP can achieve the rate given in(2.4)above. Moreover,
2.6. LINEAR PROGRAMMING RELAXATIONS49
forα≥1/2, this matches the best achievable rate obtained using SSS (Theorem
2.2).
Proof.The simple idea is that for each particular test designXand defective set
K, whenever DD succeeds, SCOMP also succeeds. More specifically, if ˆKDD =
K, then the initial choice ˆK=Kin step 1 of SCOMP (Algorithm 2.4) is already
a satisfying set, so there are no unexplained tests to consider in step 2, and the
algorithm terminates.
It is natural to ask whether SCOMP has a larger achievable rate than DD for
Bernoulli testing. We note from simulations such as Figure 2.2 that SCOMP
appears to perform strictly better than DD experimentally. However, small
experimental improvements at fixed problem sizes may not necessarily translate
to strictly improved achievable rates asn→∞. In fact, as described in Section
2.7 below, Coja-Oghlanet al.[75] have proved that SCOMP provides no such
improvement in the rate for the near-constant column weight design.
There is an analogy between SCOMP and Chvatal’s approximation algo-
rithm for the set cover problem (see Remark 2.1). At each stage, Chvatal’s
algorithm [69] greedily chooses a subset that covers the largest number of cur-
rently uncovered elements in the universe of elements. Similarly, SCOMP makes
a greedy choice of possibly defective items that explain as many currently un-
explained positive tests as possible. For a universe of|U|=mitems, Chvatal’s
algorithm produces a solution that is at mostH m times larger than the optimal
set cover, whereH m∼lnmis them-th harmonic number. This can be shown
to be the best possible approximation factor for a polynomial-time algorithm
for set cover (in the worst case) [279, Theorem 29.31]. This means that for
certain test matrices, we can view SCOMP as outputting the ‘tightest possible
polynomial-time approximation to the smallest satisfying set’. However, this
does not preclude the possibility of improved efficient approximations under
other well-chosen test matrices.
2.6 Linear programming relaxations
We saw in Section 2.2 that SSS can be cast as an integer program (IP). In
discrete optimization, a prominent approach to solving an IP is to solve its
linear programming (LP) relaxation, in which the integer variables are replaced
by real-valued random variables to produce an LP. The LP can then be solved
in polynomial time, and its solution can be rounded to be integer-valued; one
hopes that this will solve (exactly or approximately) the original IP.
An LP relaxation of SSS was proposed by Malioutov and Malyutov [208].
Recalling thatx ti indicates whether itemiis in testt, andy t is the outcome of
testt, a smallest satisfying set corresponds to an optimal solution to the integer
50CHAPTER 2. ALGORITHMS FOR NOISELESS GROUP TESTING
program
minimizez
nX
i=1
zi
subject to
nX
i=1
xtizi≥1 wheny t =1,
nX
i=1
xtizi = 0 wheny t =0,
zi∈{0,1}.
We hope that the optimalzwill be close to the true defectivity vectoruin-
troduced in Definition 1.2, since takingz=uwill satisfy the constraints. In
general, we think of each 0–1 vectorzas the indicator function of some putative
defective setL, withL=L(z) :={i:z i = 1}. The first two constraints on
zensure thatL(z) is satisfying in the sense of Definition 2.1, by considering
the positive and negative tests respectively. Hence, eachzthat achieves the
minimal value of the linear program is the indicator function of a satisfying set
of minimal size, i.e., ˆK={i:z i = 1}is a smallest satisfying set.
The LP approach attempts to estimate the defective set via a relaxed version
of the 0–1 problem, where eachz i can be any nonnegative real number. That
is, the optimization formulation is exactly as above, but with each constraint
zi∈{0,1}replaced byz i≥0. (It is unnecessary to add the extra constraints
zi ≤1, as it is straightforward to check that an optimal solution will never
contain any entries exceeding 1.)
Linear programs of this form can be solved efficiently; for example, the
ellipsoid algorithm is guaranteed to find a solution in polynomial time, though
it is typically outperformed in practice by the simplex algorithm. (See, for
example, [81, p. 897] for a discussion of the running times of linear programming
algorithms.)
There are various heuristics for how to turn an optimal solutionz= (z i)
to the relaxed program into an estimate of the defective set. For example, one
could consider the following crude method: If there is anyiwithz i /∈{0,1},
declare a global error; otherwise, estimate ˆK={i:z i = 1}to be the defective
set. Malioutov and Malyutov [208] suggest an estimate ˆK={i:z i >0}, and
show strong performance on simulated problems. Note that this rule will always
provide a satisfying set, since each positive test will have some possible defective
iwithz i that is declared defective. Alternatively, the estimate ˆK={i:z i≥
1/2}appears to be (very) slightly better in simulations, but does not guarantee
a satisfying set.
For the purposes of the following theorem, it suffices that in the event that
allz i are 0 or 1, the heuristic chooses ˆK={i:z i = 1}, as any sensible heuristic
surely must. This theorem is due to [11], and shows that the above LP approach,
like SCOMP, is at least as good as DD.
Theorem 2.6.For any given test design, any rate achievable by DD is also
achievable by LP. In particular, with a Bernoulli design and optimal choice of
the parameterp, LP can achieve the rate given in(2.4)above. Moreover, for
α≥1/2, this matches the best achievable rate obtained using SSS (Theorem
2.2).
2.7. IMPROVED RATES WITH NEAR-CONSTANT TESTS-PER-ITEM51
Proof.We argue that for any given test designXand defective setK, whenever
DD succeeds LP also succeeds. To be precise, any itemithat appears in some
negative testtmust havez i = 0 in order to satisfy the second constraint of the
linear program, Pn
i=1xtizi = 0. Furthermore, if a positive testtcontains only
one possible defectivei, the LP solution must havez i≥1 to ensure the first
constraintPn
i=1xtizi≥1 holds, and it will choosez i = 1 to minimize P
izi.
Finally, if DD succeeds then these definite defectives form a satisfying set, so all
constraints are satisfied, and the algorithm will set all otherz i = 0, to minimizeP
izi.
As with SCOMP, while simulation evidence suggests that LP often outper-
forms DD (e.g., see Figure 2.2), it is unclear whether one can formally establish
that LP attains a strictly larger rate than that of DD forα<1/2.
We briefly mention an earlier result establishing that a (different) linear
program attains a nonzero rate for allα, albeit a much lower rate than that of
Theorem 2.6. Specifically, theLiPoalgorithm of Chanet al.[53] is based on
relaxing a similar integer program to the one we surveyed, and further assumes
the decoder knowskexactly, so the linear program can be phrased as a feasibility
problem. They showed that LiPo achieves the rate
RLiPo
Bern = 1
8
3 e2 ln 2
1−α
1 +α ≈0.073 1−α
1 +α.(2.12)
2.7 Improved rates with near-constant tests-per-
item
Throughout this chapter, we have focused on Bernoulli testing designs, where
each item is independently placed in each test with a given probability, and
henceXcontains i.i.d. Bernoulli entries. Such a design is conceptually simple, is
typically the easiest to analyse mathematically, and is known to be information-
theoretically optimal fork=O(n 1/3) (see Chapter 4).
However, it turns out that the Bernoulli design is typically not the best
choice. Below, we will see that an alternative random design based onnear-
constant tests-per-itemcan improve the COMP and DD rates by a factor of
e(ln 2)2≃1.306, leading to two key implications. First, fork= Θ(n α) with
αsufficiently close to one, this combination outperforms Bernoulli testing used
in conjunction with withanydecoder. Second, for smallα, this combination
improves on the best known rate for Bernoulli testing under anypracticalde-
coder. In Chapter 4, we will see even stronger results establishing that the
near-constant tests-per-item design, paired with an optimal decoder, attains
the optimal rate among all nonadaptive designs. The results of this section are
due to Johnson, Aldridge, and Scarlett [170] and Coja-Oghlanet al.[75].
The following definition formally introduces the random design that provides
the above-mentioned improved rates.
Definition 2.3.Thenear-constant column weight(ornear-constant tests-per-
item) design with parameterν >0 forms a group testing matrixXin whichL=
νT/kentries of each column are selected uniformly at random with replacement
and set to one, with independence between columns. The remaining entries of
Xare set to zero.
52CHAPTER 2. ALGORITHMS FOR NOISELESS GROUP TESTING
(When we writeL=νT/k, we ignore rounding issues, and noting that the
results are unaffected by whether we setL=⌊νT/k⌋orL=⌈νT/k⌉)
Since we sample with replacement, some items may be in fewer thanLtests,
but typically only slightly fewer, hence the terminology ‘near-constant’. This
is a mathematical convenience that turns out to simplify the analysis. The
parametrizationL=νT/kis chosen because such scaling withν= Θ(1) turns
out to be optimal, analogously to the scalingp=ν/kin Definition 2.2. (In
Section 5.8, we will briefly survey a setting in which the number of tests per
item is constrained to be much smaller thanO(T/k).) An intuitive reason as
to why the above design may be preferable to the Bernoulli design is that it
prevents any item from being included in too few tests.
While Definition 2.3 suffices for our purposes, it is worth mentioning that
it is one of a variety of related randomized designs that have appeared in the
literature. Indeed, a variety of works have considered(exactly) constant tests-
per-item(see for example [205, 218]). We refer the reader to [170] for a more
detailed overview of the history, dating back at least as far as the early work of
Kautz and Singleton [179]. Other works have also considered constant items-
per-test (row weight) designs (for example, [52]) and doubly-regular designs with
both constant row weight and constant column weight (for example, [268]). Such
designs are not needed in this chapter, but they can provide additional benefits
in other contexts; see Sections 5.5 and 5.8.3 for examples.
We first present the rate achieved by the simple COMP algorithm (see Sec-
tion 2.3).
Theorem 2.7.Consider noiseless nonadaptive group testing with exact recovery
and the small error criterion, withk= Θ(n α)for someα∈(0,1), and using the
COMP algorithm for decoding. With a near-constant column weight design and
an optimized parameterν= ln 2, the maximum achievable rate using COMP is
R
COMP
NCC = ln 2·(1−α)≈0.693(1−α).(2.13)
This rate corresponds to a number of tests satisfying the following for arbitrarily
smallη >0:T≥(1 +η) 1
(ln 2)2klnn= (1 +η) 1
ln 2klog 2n.
Proof sketch.We omit the details of the proof for brevity, and refer the reader
to [170]. The key idea is again to formulate a coupon-collector problem (see
Remark 2.2).
First, we consider the total number of positive testsT 1. A given testtis
negative if, for each of thekdefective items, none of theL=νT/kchoices
of column entries equalt. Since these choices take place independently with
replacement, this is the same as choosingkL=νTentries in total, all inde-
pendently with replacement. Hence, the probability that testtis negative is
(1−1/T) νT∼e−ν, so the expected number of positive testsET 1∼T(1−e −ν).
Now, since changing one choice of column entry changes the number of pos-
itive tests by at most 1, the random variableT 1 satisfies the bounded difference
property in the sense of McDiarmid [216], which allows us to prove a standard
concentration bound. Specifically we can deduce by McDiarmid’s inequality
thatT 1 is close to its expected value,T 1≈T(1−e −ν), with high probability.
Conditioned onT 1, each nondefective item appears in some negative test
with probability 1−(T 1/T)L, independently of one another. Hence, assuming
2.7. IMPROVED RATES WITH NEAR-CONSTANT TESTS-PER-ITEM53
the concentration result holds (replacingT 1 by its mean), we find that
P(suc)∼
 
1−(T 1/T)Ln−k
∼
 
1−(1−e −ν)Ln
=
 
1−(1−e −ν)νT/kn
.
It is easy to check that (1−e −ν)ν is maximized atν= ln 2, where it takes
the value e−(ln 2)2
. Thus, choosingT= (1 +δ)(klnn)/(ln 2) 2 gives us that
(1−e −ν)νT/k = e−(1+δ) lnn. This allows us to deduce thatP(suc)∼(1−
n−1+δ)n∼exp(−n−δ), which tends to 1.
In terms of rates, again using Definition 1.7 and (1.11), we can deduce that
this equates to a rate of (1−α)(klnn)/(Tln 2) which approaches ln 2(1−α) as
required.
Comparing with Theorem 2.3, we see that for the COMP algorithm, the
near-constant column weight design provides an improvement of roughly 30.6%
over Bernoulli testing. In addition, the rate of Theorem 2.7 improves even over
that of the DD algorithm with Bernoulli testing, both for sufficiently smallα
and sufficiently highα. See Figure 2.1 for an illustration.
We now turn to the DD algorithm (see Section 2.4), which strictly improves
on Theorem 2.7 for allα∈(0,1).
Theorem 2.8.Consider noiseless nonadaptive group testing with exact recovery
and the small error criterion, withk= Θ(n α)for someα∈(0,1), and using the
DD algorithm for decoding. Under a near-constant column weight design with
an optimized parameterν= ln 2, the following rate is achievable:
RDD
NCC = (ln 2) min

1, 1−α
α

≈0.693 min

1, 1−α
α

.(2.14)
This rate corresponds to a number of tests satisfying the following for arbitrarily
smallη >0:T≥(1 +η) max
 1
(ln 2)2kln n
k, 1
(ln 2)2klnk
	
.
Moreover, forα≥1/2, this achieves the maximum achievable rate for SSS
using this design, R
SSS
NCC (see Theorem 2.9 below).
The proof of this result bears some similarity to that of Bernoulli testing,
but is more technically challenging. The interested reader is referred to [170]
(see also [133]).
Comparing Theorem 2.8 to Theorem 2.4, we see that the achievable rate
with the near-constant column weight design is roughly 30.6% higher than the
Bernoulli design – the same gain as that observed for COMP (see Figure 2.1).
As in the case of Bernoulli testing, one immediately deduces (by Theorem
2.5 and Theorem 2.6 respectively) that the SCOMP and LP algorithms (see
Sections 2.5 and 2.6) also achieve the rate (2.14). Moreover, in [75], it was
shown that (2.14) is themaximumachievable rate for the SCOMP (and DD)
algorithm under the near-constant column weight design, meaning that asymp-
totically SCOMP does not outperform DD. The fact that the rate cannot exceed
(ln 2)1−α
α comes from Theorem 2.9 below. As for the ln 2 term, the idea is to
show that for rates above ln 2 there exist many nondefectives that explain the
maximum possible numberLof tests, and hence even the first iteration of
SCOMP fails. It remains an open problem as to whether a similar phenomenon
holds for other test designs, such as Bernoulli testing.
Next, we present a converse bound [170, Theorem 4] for SSS, which notably
matches the rate of the DD algorithm whenαis above a threshold of roughly
0.409.
54CHAPTER 2. ALGORITHMS FOR NOISELESS GROUP TESTING
Theorem 2.9.Consider noiseless nonadaptive group testing with exact recovery
and the small error criterion, withk= Θ(n α)forα∈(0,1), and using the
SSS algorithm for decoding. With a near-constant column weight design, the
maximum achievable rate is bounded above by
R
SSS
NCC≤min

1,ln 2 1−α
α

.(2.15)
This rate upper bound corresponds to the condition that any algorithm must
have a number of tests satisfying the following for arbitrarily smallη >0:T≥
(1−η) max

klog 2
n
k, 1
(ln 2)2klnk
	
.
This result is analogous to Theorem 2.2. In Chapter 4, we will survey a recent
result of Coja-Oghlanet al.[75] showing that the rate (2.15) is achievable for
allα∈(0,1), and deduce that (2.15) gives the maximum achievable rate for the
near-constant column weight design.
Chapter 3
Algorithms for Noisy
Group Testing
3.1 Noisy channel models
In Chapter 2, we focused on noiseless group testing algorithms and their the-
oretical guarantees. From both a theoretical and practical perspective, these
algorithms (as presented) rely strongly on the assumption that there is no noise.
In this chapter, we give an overview of some algorithms that are designed to
handle noisy scenarios, most of which build on the ideas from the noiseless set-
ting. We initially present heuristic approaches, and then move on to techniques
with theoretical guarantees.
For many of the applications described in Section 1.7, it is clearly an unre-
alistic modelling assumption that the tests would be able to perfectly identify
whether any defective item is present in the pool. There are a variety of ways
of modelling the noise, which affect the algorithms and their performance in
different ways. We proceed by giving several illustrative examples.
Recall that standard noiseless group testing can be formulated component-
wise using the BooleanORoperation asy t =W
i∈Kxti (see (1.2)). One of the
simplest noise models simply considers the scenario where these values W
i∈Kxti
are flipped independently at random with a given probability.
Example 3.1(Binary symmetric noise).In the binary symmetric noise model,
thet-th test outcome is given by
Yt =
(W
i∈KXti with probability 1−ρ
1− W
i∈KXti with probabilityρ. (3.1)
This is, each test is flipped independently with probabilityρ.
While the binary noise model is an interesting one, many applications in Sec-
tion 1.7 suggest that false positive tests and false negative tests may occur with
different probabilities. We proceed by presenting some examples, maintaining
the standard assumption that distinct test outcomes are conditionally indepen-
dent givenX. Furthermore, we assume that each test has the same probability
distribution specifying its outcome, and that this distribution depends on the
55
56CHAPTER 3. ALGORITHMS FOR NOISY GROUP TESTING
test designXonly through the number of defective items in the test and the
total number of items in the test. For reasons of generality, we no longer insist
that the test outcomesy t can only take values in{0,1}, but rather consider the
case ofy t∈Yfor some finite alphabetY. We follow in part the notation of [9,
Section 6.3].
Definition 3.1.We define the probability transition functionp(·|m,ℓ) such
that for a test containingmitems,ℓof which are defective, for each outcome
y∈Ywe have
P
 
Yt =y

nX
i=1
Xti =m,
X
i∈K
Xti =ℓ
!
=p(y|m,ℓ),(3.2)
independently of all other tests.
In other words,p(y|m,ℓ) is the probability of observing outcomeyfrom a
test containingℓdefective items andmitems in total. Note that P
y∈Yp(y|
m,ℓ) = 1 for allmandℓ.
For example, the standard noiseless group testing model has probability
transition function
p(1|m,ℓ) = 1 ifℓ≥1,p(0|m,ℓ) = 0 ifℓ≥1,
p(1|m,ℓ) = 0 ifℓ= 0,p(0|m,ℓ) = 1 ifℓ= 0,
(3.3)
independent ofm. Similarly, the binary symmetric noise model of Example 3.1
has probability transition function
p(1|m,ℓ) = 1−ρifℓ≥1,p(0|m,ℓ) =ρifℓ≥1,
p(1|m,ℓ) =ρifℓ= 0,p(0|m,ℓ) = 1−ρifℓ= 0. (3.4)
Definition 3.1 captures a variety of other noise models, one of which is the
addition noise model of [24]. Here false negative tests never occur, but false
positive tests occur independently with a given probabilityφ.
Example 3.2(Addition noise).In theaddition noisemodel, the probability
transition function is given by
p(1|m,ℓ) = 1 ifℓ≥1,p(0|m,ℓ) = 0 ifℓ≥1,
p(1|m,ℓ) =φifℓ= 0,p(0|m,ℓ) = 1−φifℓ= 0, (3.5)
whereφ∈(0,1) is a noise parameter.
We note that the noise processes described in Examples 3.1 and 3.2 can both
be thought of as sending the outcome of standard noiseless group testing through
a noisy communication channel (see Definition 3.3 below). Another interesting
model, which cannot be represented in this way, is the dilution model of [24].
This captures the idea that in some scenarios (such as DNA testing), the more
defectives are present, the more likely we are to observe a positive test.
In this model, the outcome of a test containingℓ≥1 defectives will be
positive if and only if a Binomial(ℓ,1−ϑ) random variable is at least one.
Equivalently, this can be thought of as a scenario where every defective item
included in the test only ‘behaves as a defective’ with probability 1−ϑ, whereas
with probabilityϑit is ‘diluted’.
3.1. NOISY CHANNEL MODELS57
Example 3.3(Dilution noise).In thedilution noisemodel, the probability
transition function is given by
p(1|m,ℓ) = 1−ϑ ℓ, p(0|m,ℓ) =ϑ ℓ,for allℓ≥0, (3.6)
whereϑ∈(0,1) is a noise parameter.
An analogous model to the dilution noise model is the Z channel noise model,
in which tests containing defective items are erroneously negative with some
fixed probability.
Example 3.4(Z channel noise).In theZ channelnoise model, the probability
transition function is given by
p(1|m,ℓ) = 1−ϑifℓ≥1,p(0|m,ℓ) =ϑifℓ≥1,
p(1|m,ℓ) = 0 ifℓ= 0,p(0|m,ℓ) = 1 ifℓ= 0, (3.7)
whereϑ∈(0,1) is a noise parameter.
By analogy, the addition noise channel (Example 3.2) can also be viewed as
‘reverse Z channel’ noise. Examples 3.1, 3.2, and 3.4 can also all be viewed as
special cases of the following general noise model.
Example 3.5(Binary channel noise).In thegeneral binary channel noise
model, the probability transition function is given by
p(1|m,ℓ) = 1−ρ 10 ifℓ≥1,p(0|m,ℓ) =ρ 10 ifℓ≥1,
p(1|m,ℓ) =ρ 01 ifℓ= 0,p(0|m,ℓ) = 1−ρ 01 ifℓ= 0, (3.8)
whereρ 01,ρ 10∈[0,1] are noise parameters.
An example to illustrate the fact that the alphabetYneed not be{0,1}is
the erasure noise model, where each test may fail to give a conclusive result.
We represent such an outcome by a question mark ?. In this case,Y={0,1,?},
and the noise model is defined as follows.
Example 3.6(Erasure noise).In theerasure noisemodel, the probability
transition function is given by
p(1|m,ℓ) = 1−ξifℓ≥1,p(?|m,ℓ) =ξifℓ≥1,
p(?|m,ℓ) =ξifℓ= 0,p(0|m,ℓ) = 1−ξifℓ= 0, (3.9)
whereξ∈(0,1) is a noise parameter, and all other values ofp(·|m,ℓ) are zero.
Next, we provide another example of interest from [185], falling under the
broad category ofthreshold group testing(see, for example, [64, 86]). In this
example, a positive result is attained when the proportion of items in the test
exceeds some threshold θ, a negative result is obtained when the proportion is
below another thresholdθ (withθ ≤θ), and positive and negative outcomes are
equally likely when the proportion is in between these thresholds.
58CHAPTER 3. ALGORITHMS FOR NOISY GROUP TESTING
Example 3.7(Threshold group testing).In theprobabilistic threshold group
testing noisemodel, the probability transition function is given by
p(1|m,ℓ) = 1 if ℓ
m≥θ,p(0|m,ℓ) = 0 if ℓ
m≥θ,
p(1|m,ℓ) = 0 if ℓ
m≤θ ,p(0|m,ℓ) = 1 if ℓ
m≤θ ,
p(1|m,ℓ) = 1
2 ifθ < ℓ
m <θ,p(0|m,ℓ) = 1
2 ifθ < ℓ
m <θ ,
(3.10)
whereθ ≤θare thresholds.
Another variation in [185] instead assumes that the probability of a positive
test increases from 0 to 1 in a linear fashion in between the two thresholds,
rather than always equalling 1
2. It is worth noting that, while our focus is on
random noise models, most works on threshold group testing have focused on
adversarialnoise [64, 86].
The noise models described in (3.3), (3.4), (3.5), (3.6), (3.7), and (3.9) above
share the property thatp(·|m,ℓ) does not depend onm. Of course, this need
not be the case in general, as Example 3.7 shows. However, this property is
sufficiently useful that we follow [9, Definition 6.11] in explicitly naming it.
Definition 3.2.We say that a noise model satisfies theonly defects matter
property if the probability transition function is of the form
p(y|m,ℓ) =p(y|ℓ).(3.11)
Properties of this type have been exploited in general sparse estimation prob-
lems beyond group testing (see for example [8, 213, 243]). In these cases, this
property means that only the columns of a measurement matrix that correspond
to the nonzero entries of a sparse vector impact the samples, and that the cor-
responding output distribution is permutation-invariant with respect to these
columns.
While the only defects matter property, Definition 3.2, does not hold in
general, it plays a significant role in many proofs of noisy group testing results.
For example, this assumption will be used throughout Chapter 4 to provide
information-theoretic achievability and converse results. Some further evidence
for the value of Definition 3.2 is that Furon [123] gives examples where ‘only
defects matter’ does not hold and a nonzero rate cannot be achieved.
A further interesting special case of Definition 3.2 is when the noisy group
testing process can be thought of as sending the outcome of standard noiseless
group testing through a noisy ‘communication’ channel.
Definition 3.3(Noisy defective channel).If we can express
p(y|m,ℓ) =p(y|1{ℓ≥1}),(3.12)
wherep(y|1{ℓ≥1}) is the transition probability function of a noisy binary-
input communication channel, then we say that thenoisy defective channel
propertyholds.
In the typical scenario wherey∈{0,1}is also binary, this definition coincides
with the binary channel noise of Example 3.5. In the case that this property
holds, the following result is stated in [29].
3.1. NOISY CHANNEL MODELS59
Theorem 3.1.If the noisy defective channel property (Definition 3.3) holds
then the group testing capacityC(in the sense of Definition 1.8) satisfies the
following, regardless of whether the test design is adaptive or nonadaptive:
C≤C chan,(3.13)
whereC chan is the Shannon capacity of the corresponding noisy communication
channelp(y|1{ℓ≥1}).
In fact, a similar result holds more generally even when the channelp(y|ℓ) has
a nonbinary input indicating the number of defectives in the test; however, it is
primarily the form stated in Theorem 3.1 that has been useful when comparing
to achievability results.
One may be tempted to conjecture that fork=o(n), equality holds in (3.13)
foradaptivegroup testing. This conjecture was shown to be true in [239] for
the Z channel noise model (Example 3.4), but false whenk= Θ(n α) forα
sufficiently close to one under the binary symmetric noise and addition noise
models (Examples 3.1 and 3.2).
The argument given in [29] to prove Theorem 3.1 uses the fact that the test
outcome vectory= (y 1,...,y T ) acts like the output of the channel whose input
codeword is indexed by the defective set. Since the transmission of information
is impossible at rates above capacity, it certainly remains impossible in the
presence of the extra constraints imposed by the group testing problem.
The noisy defective channel property of Definition 3.3 is satisfied by the
models described in (3.3), (3.4), (3.5), (3.7), and (3.9) (though not the dilution
model (3.6) or threshold model (3.10)). For example, we can deduce that the
binary symmetric model Definition 3.4 has group testing capacityC≤1−
h(ρ), whereh(·) is the binary entropy function. It remains an open problem to
determine under what conditions this bound is sharp; in Section 4.6, we will see
that it is sharp in the sparse regimek=O(n α) whenαis sufficiently small.
A simple case in which we can determine the adaptive group testing capacity
is the erasure model; the following result is from [29, Theorem 1.3.1].
Theorem 3.2.The capacity of adaptive group testing isC= 1−ξfor the
erasure model of Example 3.6 whenk=o(n).
Proof.This is achieved by simply using a noiseless adaptive group testing scheme
(see Section 1.5), and repeating tests for whichy t = ?. Standard concentration
bounds reveal that, for anyϵ>0, no more thanT(ξ+ϵ) tests will need repeat-
ing (with probability approaching one asn→∞), and the result follows from
Theorem 1.3.
A similar argument can be used to determine bounds on the rates of non-
adaptive algorithms under Bernoulli designs for the erasure noise model of Ex-
ample 3.6. Again, with high probability, givenTtests, we know there should
be at leastT(1−ξ−ϵ) tests that are not erased. Hence, simply ignoring the
tests which return a ?, it is as if we have been given a Bernoulli design matrix
with at leastT(1−ξ−ϵ) rows.
Hence, for example, if there arek= Θ(n α) defectives, then building on
Theorem 2.4, we can achieve a rate of
1−ξ
e ln 2min

1, 1−α
α

(3.14)
60CHAPTER 3. ALGORITHMS FOR NOISY GROUP TESTING
using the DD algorithm and a Bernoulli test design. Similarly, building on
Theorem 2.2, we know that even the SSS algorithm cannot achieve a rate greater
than
(1−ξ) max
ν>0
min

h(e−ν), ν
eν ln 2
1−α
α

.(3.15)
for Bernoulli designs.
We also briefly mention that since the addition noise channel (Example 3.2)
satisfies the property that a negative outcome is definitive proof of no defectives
being present, we can easily extend the analysis of the COMP algorithm to de-
duce a counterpart to Theorem 2.3 (see [246, Lemma 1] for details). Specifically,
since a proportionφof the negative tests are flipped at random, we can achieve
a rate of 1−φ
e ln 2(1−α) using the COMP algorithm (see [246, eq. (149)]).
In the remainder of the chapter, we describe a variety of algorithms that can
be used to solve noisy group testing problems in the presence of both false pos-
itive tests and false negative tests (e.g., for the binary symmetric noise model).
Most of these are extensions of the noiseless algorithms presented in Chapter 2,
and like that chapter, we initially focus our attention on nonadaptive Bernoulli
test designs, the small-error recovery criterion, and the scalingk= Θ(n α) with
α∈(0,1). See also Section 3.7 for improved rates via near-constant tests-per-
item.
3.2 Noisy linear programming relaxations
Recall the linear programming relaxation for the noiseless setting in Section
2.6. A similar idea can be used in the noisy setting by introducingslack vari-
ables, which leads to a formulation allowing ‘flipped’ test outcomes but paying
a penalty in the objective function for doing so. Using this idea, the following
formulation was proposed in [208]:
minimizez,ξ
nX
i=1
zi +λ
TX
t=1
ξj
subject toz i≥0
ξt≥0
ξt≤1 wheny t = 1
nX
i=1
xtizi =ξ t wheny t = 0
nX
i=1
xtizi +ξt≥1 wheny t = 1.
As in the noiseless setting,zrepresents an estimate of the defectivity indicator
vectoru(see Definition 1.2), whereas here we also have a vector ofTslack
variablesξ= (ξ 1,...,ξ T ). The parameterλcontrols the trade-off between
declaring a small number of items to be defective (sparsity) and the degree
to which the test outcomes are in agreement with the decodedz i (most slack
variables being zero). Observe that if we were to further constrain eachz i and
ξt to be binary-valued (0 or 1), then the above formulation would be minimizing
a weighted combination of the number of (estimated) defectives and the number
3.3. BELIEF PROPAGATION61
of ‘flipped’ tests. Such a binary-valued minimization problem, with a suitable
choice ofλ, can also be shown to be equivalent tomaximum a posteriori(MAP)
decoding under an i.i.d. defectivity model (see the Appendix to Chapter 1) and
symmetric noise (see Example 3.1); the details can be found in [70, Section 5.3].
The above formulation treats false positive tests and false negative tests
equally. However, it can also be modified to weigh the two differently; in the
extreme case, if it is known that a test with no defectivesdefinitelyresults in
a negative outcome (e.g., dilution noise of Example 3.3, or Z channel noise of
Example 3.4), then we could replace all of the slack variables corresponding to
negative tests by zero. An analogous statement holds true when a test with at
least one defectivedefinitelyresults in a positive outcome (e.g., addition noise
of Example 3.2).
To the best of our knowledge, no theoretical results are known for the above
noisy linear program relaxation. However, this method has been seen to provide
excellent performance in numerical experiments [208]; see Section 3.8 for an
illustration.
A related noisy linear program relaxation usingnegative tests onlywas
proved to achieve positive rates in [53]. However, there are two notable lim-
itations. First, from a theoretical view, the constants were not optimized in the
proofs, and so the rates are far from optimal. Second, from a practical view,
ignoring the tests with positive outcomes can significantly worsen the perfor-
mance.
3.3 Belief propagation
A decoding algorithm based on belief propagation was described in [249, Section
III]. Although there was no attempt to calculate performance bounds or rates,
there was some numerical evidence presented to show that this approach can
work very well (see also Section 3.8, as well as [79] for an extensive empirical
study). The success of belief propagation experimentally is perhaps unsurpris-
ing, since it has enjoyed considerable success for the decoding of LDPC codes
over noisy channels, a problem that shares characteristics with group testing.
Recall from Definition 1.2 that we writeu i =1{i∈K}to indicate whether
or not itemiis defective. The idea is to estimate the defective set by working
with the marginals of the posterior distribution, and for eachi, seek to estimate
ui as
bui := arg max
ui∈{0,1}
P(ui|y),(3.16)
whereyis the vector of test outcomes. Clearly, we would prefer to optimize
this posterior probability as a function of all the (u i)i∈{1,...,n}, but this would
be computationally infeasible due to the size of the search space.
While exactly computing the probabilityP(ui|y) appearing in (3.16) is also
difficult, we can approximately compute it using loopy belief propagation. To
understand this, we set up a bipartite graph withnnodes on one side corre-
sponding to items, andTnodes on the other side corresponding to tests. Each
test node is connected to all of the nodes corresponding to items included in the
test. See Figure 3.1 for a simple example.
62CHAPTER 3. ALGORITHMS FOR NOISY GROUP TESTING
Items
Tests
m(r)
i!t(ui) ˆm(r)
t!i(ui)
Figure 3.1: Example bipartite graph used in belief propagation decoding. Edges
represent the inclusion of items in tests, and messages are passed in both direc-
tions.
Assuming thatkout ofnitems are defective, a natural prior is given by
P(Ui =1) = k
n =:q,(3.17)
and for analytical tractability, an independent priorP(u) = Qn
i=1 P(ui) is
adopted. Even for a combinatorial prior whereKis uniform over
 n
k

possible
defective sets, (3.17) yields a good approximation for largekdue to concentra-
tion of measure. In either case, this method (as described here) requires at least
approximate knowledge ofk.
In accordance with general-purpose techniques for loopy belief propagation
(e.g., see [203, Ch. 26]), messages are iteratively passed from items to tests and
tests to items. LettingN(i) andN(t) denote the neighbours of an item node
and test node respectively, the item-to-test and test-to-item message are given
as follows [249]:
m(r)
i→t(ui)∝
 
q1{ui = 1}+ (1−q)1{u i = 0}
 Y
t′∈N(i)\{t}
bm(r)
t′→i(ui) (3.18)
bm(r)
t→i(ui)∝
X
{ui′}i′∈N(t)\{i}
P(yt|u [t])
Y
i′∈N(t)\{i}
m(r)
i′→t(ui),(3.19)
whererindexes the round of message passing,∝denotes equality up to a
normalizing constant, andu [t] denotes the subvector ofucorresponding to the
items in testt, which are the only ones that impacty t. These messages amount
to updating beliefs of the test outcomesy t in terms ofu i, and beliefs ofu i in
terms of the test outcomesy t. By iterating these steps, we hope to converge to
a sufficiently good approximation of the posterior.
The sum over{u i′}i′∈N(t)\{i} in (3.19) grows exponentially in the number
of items in the test, so these messages are still expensive to compute if the
computation is done naively. Fortunately, at least for certain noise models, it is
possible to rewrite the messages in a form that permits efficient computation.
In [249], this was shown for the following model that combines the addition and
dilution models of Examples 3.2 and 3.3:
p(1|m,ℓ) = 1−(1−φ)ϑ ℓ, p(0|m,ℓ) = (1−φ)ϑ ℓ,for allℓ≥0. (3.20)
3.3. BELIEF PROPAGATION63
Observe that settingφ= 0 recovers the dilution model, whereas settingϑ= 0
recovers the addition model.
For this model, it is convenient to work with log-ratios of the messages,
defined as
L(r)
i→t = lnm(r)
i→t(1)
m(r)
i→t(0)
and bL(r)
t→i = ln bm(r)
t→i(1)
bm(r)
t→i(0)
.(3.21)
The natural priorP(u i =1) =qmentioned above means thatL (r)
i→t should
be initialized asL (0)
i→t = ln q
1−q . Then the item-to-test updates in subsequent
rounds easily follow from (3.18):
L(r+1)
i→t = ln
 q
1−q

+
X
t′∈N(i)\{t}
bL(r)
t′→i.(3.22)
The test-to-item messages require a bit more effort to derive, but the analysis
is entirely elementary. If the testtis positive (y t = 1), we obtain [249]
bL(r)
t→i = ln

ϑ+ 1−ϑ
1−(1−φ) Q
j∈N(t)\{i}

ϑ+ 1−ϑ
1+exp(L(r)
j→t)


,
and if the testtis negative (y t = 0), we simply have bL(r)
i→i = lnϑ[249].
We are not aware of any works simplifying the messages (or their log-ratios)
for general noise models. Since the binary symmetric noise model of Example
3.1 (with parameterρ) is particularly widely-adopted, we also state such a
simplification here without proof. Ify t = 0, then
ˆm(r+1)
t→i (ui)∝



ρ
Y
i′∈N(t)\{i}
 
m(r)
i′→t(0) +m (r)
i′→t(1)

ui = 1
ρ
Y
i′∈N(t)\{i}
 
m(r)
i′→t(0) +m (r)
i′→t(1)

+ (1−2ρ)
Y
i′∈N(t)\{i}
m(r)
i′→t(0)
ui = 0,
while ify t = 1, then
ˆm(r+1)
t→i (ui)∝



(1−ρ)
Y
i′∈N(t)\{i}
 
m(r)
i′→t(0) +m (r)
i′→t(1)

ui = 1
(1−ρ)
Y
i′∈N(t)\{i}
 
m(r)
i′→t(0) +m (r)
i′→t(1)

−(1−2ρ)
Y
i′∈N(t)\{i}
m(r)
i′→t(0)
ui = 0.
Here we found it more convenient to work directly with the messages rather than
their log-ratios; the two are equivalent in the sense that either can be computed
from the other.
In the case thatkis known exactly, instead of declaring ˆu i to be zero or one
according to (3.16), one can sort the estimates ofP(u i = 1|y) in decreasing
64CHAPTER 3. ALGORITHMS FOR NOISY GROUP TESTING
order and declare the resulting topkitems to be the defective set. Moreover,
while (3.16) amounts to declaring an item defective if the estimate ofP(u i =
1|y) exceeds 1
2, one could threshold at values other than 1
2. This would be
of interest, for example, in scenarios where false positives and false negatives in
the reconstruction are not considered equally bad.
3.3.1 Other algorithms based on Monte Carlo and mes-
sage passing
A distinct but related approach to belief propagation is based on generating
samples fromP(K|y) via Markov chain Monte Carlo (MCMC). To our knowl-
edge, the MCMC approach to group testing was initiated by Knill, Schliep, and
Torney [183]; see also [247] and [124] for related follow-up works. These papers
use the notion of Gibbs sampling: A randomly-initialized setK 0⊆{1,...,n}
is sequentially updated by choosing an item in{1,...,n}(e.g., uniformly at
random) and deciding whether it should be added or removed (or unchanged)
from the set. Specifically, this decision is made based on a posterior calculation
using Bayes rule, analogously to the belief propagation updates.
The Gibbs sampling procedure is designed to produce a Markov chain with
stationary distributionP(K |y), so that after sufficiently many iterations,
the set being maintained is also approximately distributed according toP(K|
y). After taking numerous samples of sets from this distribution, the most
commonly-occurring items are taken to be the final estimate ˆK. Similarly to
belief propagation, most studies on MCMC have lacked theory and been based
on empirical evaluation. However, a notable exception is the recent work of
Lovig and Zadik [200] studying the theory of MCMC in the noiseless setting;
the details are deferred to Section 5.9.
Yet another related decoding strategy isgeneralized approximate message
passing(GAMP), which has had considerable success in related areas such as
compressed sensing. Its use in group testing was explored in [51, 141, 174], all
of which allowed the incorporation of additional prior information (see Section
5.6 for further discussion). These works again focused on empirical evaluation
rather than theoretical guarantees.
3.4 Noisy COMP
In Section 2.3, we discussed the analysis given by [52, 53] of the simple COMP
algorithm in the noiseless case. In the same works, the authors also introduced
a noisy version of COMP, which we refer to as NCOMP. The authors focused
on the binary symmetric noise model (Example 3.1) with parameterρ∈
 
0, 1
2

,
and we do the same in this section, but it is also possible to handle other noise
models (e.g., see [133]).
The idea of NCOMP is that for any itemi∈ {1,...,n}, if the item is
defective, then among the tests whereiis included, we should expect roughly
a fraction 1−ρof the outcomes to be positive. In contrast, if the item is
nondefective, we should expect a smaller fraction of the outcomes to be positive.
Thus, the algorithm declares itemito be defective or nondefective according to
3.4. NOISY COMP65
the following rule:
Declareidefective⇐⇒
PT
t=1 1{Xti = 1∩y t = 1}
PT
t=1 1{Xti = 1}
≥1−ρ(1 + ∆) (3.23)
for some parameter ∆>0. Note that this rule requires knowledge of the noise
levelρ.
It was shown in [52, 53] that with a suitable choice of ∆, NCOMP achieves
a positive rate for allα∈(0,1), albeit generally far from the information-
theoretic limits of Section 4.6. The rates presented in [52, 53] differ according
to the choice ofν >0, but as discussed in [245, Footnote 3], the best rate that
can be ascertaineddirectlyfrom these works is
˜RNCOMP
Bern = (1−2ρ) 2(1−α)
4.36(1 +√α)2 ,(3.24)
and amounts to choosingν= 1.
We provide only a high-level outline of the proof of (3.24), and refer the
reader to [52, 53] for the details. The analysis separately characterizes the
probability of a given defective wrongly being declared as nondefective (by fail-
ing the threshold test in (3.23)) and a given nondefective wrongly being declared
defective. The i.i.d. nature of the test matrix and noise permits a concentra-
tion of measure argument, from which it can be shown that both of these error
events decay exponentially inTas long as ∆ is not too high. Applying the
union bound leads to a multiplication of the preceding probabilities bykand
n−krespectively, and the analysis is completed by choosingTlarge enough to
make the resulting bound decay to zero, as well as optimizing ∆ andν.
An improved rate for a slight variation of NCOMP can be inferred from
the subsequent work of Scarlett and Johnson [246], and is formally stated in a
related paper by Gebhardet al.[133, Proposition E.1]. 1 Specifically, instead
of thresholding the ratio as stated in (3.23), this variant of NCOMP simply
thresholds the number of negative tests containing the item:
Declareidefective⇐⇒
TX
t=1
1{Xti = 1∩y t = 0}<γ· Tν
k ,(3.25)
for some parameterγ >0. Recalling that we consider Bernoulli testing with
p= ν
k , we see that Tν
k is simply theaveragenumber of tests each item is placed
in, and using this average slightly simplifies the analysis compared to using the
actual (random) value. The resulting rate is stated in the following theorem, in
which the noise model may be symmetric or asymmetric.
Theorem 3.3.Consider the NCOMP decoding rule(3.25)under the Bernoulli
test design with parameterp= ν
k , and suppose thatk= Θ(n α)for someα∈
(0,1). Moreover, consider the noise model from Example 3.5 in which tests with
no defectives (respectively, with defectives) are flipped to 1 (respectively, 0) with
probabilityρ 01 (respectively,ρ 10), where the noise parameters(ρ 01,ρ 10)satisfy
ρ01 +ρ 10 <1. Then, the following rate is achieved:
RNCOMP
Bern = (1−α)ν
ln 2 max
γ∈(ρ10,w)
min
 1
αDρ10(γ),Dw(γ)

,(3.26)
1Their expressions are written in terms of binary relative entropies; below we simplify these
by replacingk d
  a
k∥ b
k

byalog a
b +b−a; these are equivalent up to lower-order terms.
66CHAPTER 3. ALGORITHMS FOR NOISY GROUP TESTING
where we definew=e −ν(1−ρ 01) + (1−e−ν)ρ10 andD a(t) =tlog t
a +a−t.
While this rate expression is slightly complicated, the idea of the analysis is
broadly similar to before: Bound the probability that a given item leads to an
incorrect decision in (3.25), and then apply a union bound over all items. For
the defectives, a union bound overkitems yields the first term in the minimum
in (3.26), and for the nondefectives, a union bound overn−kitems yields the
second term. Importantly, the analysis of each item uses tight Chernoff bounds,
as opposed to looser concentration inequalities that were used to derive rates
such as (3.24). The maximization overγin (3.26) arises from optimizing the
choice of threshold.
The rate in Theorem 3.3, along with those of other algorithms and test
designs, will be compared visually in Section 3.8.
3.5 Separate decoding of items
The NCOMP algorithm described above decodes each item individually: The
decision on whether or not itemiis defective is based only on thei-th column of
X, along withy. This general principle of decoding items separately was in fact
introduced in an early work of Malyutov and Mateev [214], and shown to come
with strong theoretical guarantees in the case thatk=O(1). It was originally
referred to asseparate testing of inputs, but we adopt the terminologyseparate
decoding of itemsto avoid possible confusion with individual testing (choosing
Xto be the identity matrix).
Again, recall thatu i =1{i∈K}indicates whether or not itemiis defective.
The decoding rule for itemiproposed in [214] is as follows:
Declareidefective⇐⇒
TX
t=1
log2
PY|Xi,Ui(yt|xti,1)
PY (yt) ≥γ(3.27)
whereγ >0 is a threshold, andP Y|Xi,Ui is the conditional distribution of a test
outcome given a single item’s inclusion indicator and defectivity indicator. This
can be interpreted as the Neyman-Pearson test for binary hypothesis testing
with hypothesesH 0 :u i = 0 andH 1 :u i = 1; note thatP Y|Xi,Ui(yt|xti,0) is the
same asP Y (yt) regardless of the value ofx ti, since nondefective items do not
impact the test outcome.
We briefly mention that the decoder (3.27), along with its analysis (outlined
below), can be viewed as a simplified and computationally efficient counterpart
to an intractablejointdecoding rule based on thresholding. The latter is sur-
veyed in Chapter 4 as a means to deriving information-theoretic achievability
bounds. See also [185, 156] for further works comparing separate and joint
decoding.
The results of [214] indicate the following: Whenk=O(1) andn→∞, the
rate achieved by separate decoding of items for the noiseless model or binary
symmetric noise model iswithin anln 2factor of the optimal (joint) decoder.
For instance, in the noiseless setting, a rate of ln 2≃0.693 bits/test is attained,
thus being reasonably close to the optimal rate of one.
For more general noise models, under Bernoulli testing, a sufficient condition
3.5. SEPARATE DECODING OF ITEMS67
on the number of tests for vanishing error probability is [214]
T≥ log2p
I1
(1 +o(1)),
where thesingle-item mutual informationI 1 is defined as follows, with implicit
conditioning on item 1 being defective, andX 1 denoting whether it was included
in a given test that produced the outcomeY:
I1 =I(X 1;Y).(3.28)
In a follow-up work [211], similar results were shown when the rule (3.27) is
replaced by auniversalrule (one that does not depend on the noise distribution)
based on the empirical mutual information.
In this monograph, we are primarily interested in the sparse regimek=
Θ(nα), as opposed to the very sparse regimek=O(1). Separate decoding of
items was studied under the former setting by Scarlett and Cevher [245], with
the main results for specific models including the following.
Theorem 3.4.Consider the separate decoding of items technique under i.i.d.
Bernoulli testing with parameterp= ln 2
k (soν= ln 2), withk= Θ(n α)for
someα∈(0,1). Then we have the following:
•Under the noiseless model, there exists a constantc(δ ′)>0such that the
following rate is achieved:
RSD
Bern = max
δ′>0
min

(ln 2)(1−α)(1−δ ′),c(δ′)1−α
α

.(3.29)
In particular, asα→0, the rate approachesln 2bits/test.
•Under the binary symmetric noise model(3.1)with parameterρ∈
 
0, 1
2

,
there exists a constantc ρ(δ′)>0such that the following rate is achieved:
RSD
Bern(ρ) = max
δ′>0
min

(ln 2)(1−h(ρ))(1−α)(1−δ ′),cρ(δ′)1−α
α

.(3.30)
Hence, asα→0, the rate approaches(ln 2)(1−h(ρ)).
The quantitiesc(δ ′) andc ρ(δ′) are related to concentration bounds arising
in the analysis, as we discuss in the proof outline below. Explicit expressions for
these quantities can be found in [245], but they are omitted here since they are
somewhat complicated. For both the noiseless and symmetric noise models, in
the limit asα→0, the rate comes within a ln 2 factor of the channel capacity,
which cannot be exceeded by any group testing algorithm (see Theorem 3.1).
In [185], characterizations of the mutual informationI 1 in (3.28) were also given
for a variety of other noisy group testing models.
Overview of proof of Theorem 3.4As stated following (3.27), the decoder
for a given item performs a binary hypothesis test to determine whether the
item is defective. As a result, analysing the error probability amounts to char-
acterizing the probabilities of false positives and false negatives in the recovery.
68CHAPTER 3. ALGORITHMS FOR NOISY GROUP TESTING
We first consider false positives. Lettingirepresent a nondefective item, and
lettingX i = [X1i,...,X Ti ]T be the corresponding column ofX, the probability
of being declared defective is
Pfp =
X
xi,y
P(xi)P(y)1
 TX
t=1
log2
PY|Xi,Ui(yi|x ti,1)
PY (yt) ≥γ

(3.31)
≤
X
xi,y
P(xi)
 TY
t=1
PY|Xi,Ui(yi|x ti,1)

2−γ (3.32)
= 2−γ,(3.33)
where (3.31) substitutes the decoding rule (3.27) and uses the fact that the
columnX i and test outcomesYare independent wheniis nondefective; (3.32)
follows by writing the sum of logarithms as the logarithm of a product and noting
thatP(y) = QT
t=1PY (yt), which means that the event in the indicator funtion
can be re-arranged toP(y)≤
 QT
t=1PY|Xi,Ui(yi|x ti,1)

2−γ; and (3.33) follows
since we are summing a joint probability distribution over all of its values. Since
there aren−knondefectives, we can use the union bound to conclude that for
anyδ >0, the choice
γ= log 2
n−k
δ
suffices to ensure that the probability ofanyfalse positives is at mostδ.
With this choice ofγ, the probability of any given defective itemibeing
declared as nondefective is given by
Pfn =P
 TX
t=1
log2
PY|Xi,Ui(Yt|Xti,1)
PY (Yt) ≤log 2
n−k
δ

.(3.34)
Observe that the mean of the left-hand side inside the probability is exactly
TI 1, withI 1 being the mutual information term defined in (3.28). Moreover,
the probability itself is simply the lower tail probability of an i.i.d. sum, and
hence, we should expect some degree of concentration around the mean. To see
this more concretely, we note that as long as
T≥ log2
n−k
δ
I1(1−δ ′) (3.35)
for someδ ′∈(0,1), we have
Pfn≤P
 TX
t=1
log2
PY|Xi,Ui(Yt|X ti,1)
PY (Yt) ≤TI 1(1−δ ′)

,(3.36)
which is the probability of an i.i.d. sum being a factor 1−δ ′ below its mean.
In the very sparse regimek=O(1), establishing the required concentration
is straightforward – it suffices to apply Chebyshev’s inequality to conclude that
Pfn→0 for arbitrarily smallδ ′. We can then apply a union bound over thek
defective items to deduce that the probability ofanyfalse negatives vanishes,
and we readily deduce (3.5).
The sparse regimek= Θ(n α) is more challenging, and the choice of con-
centration inequality can differ depending on the specific noise model. We omit
3.6. NOISY (NEAR-)DEFINITE DEFECTIVES69
the details, which are given in [245], and merely state that in Theorem 3.4,
the second result makes use of a general bound based on Bernstein’s inequality,
whereas the first result uses a sharper bound specifically tailored to the noiseless
model.
3.6 Noisy (near-)definite defectives
We saw in Chapter 2 that the Definite Defectives (DD) algorithm (Algorithm
2.3) achieves the best known rates of any practical algorithm in the noiseless
setting. As a result, there is substantial motivation for developing analogous
algorithms in noisy settings. Here we present such an algorithm, developed by
Scarlett and Johnson [246], which is suitable for noise models satisfying the
noisy defective channel property (Definition 3.3), and is again practical in the
sense of havingO(nT) decoding time.
Under Bernoulli testing with parameterν >0, the algorithm accepts two
parameters (γ1,γ 2) and proceeds as follows:
1. For eachi∈ {1,...,n}, letT neg(i) be the number of negative tests in
which itemiis included. In the first step, we construct the following set
of items that are believed to be nondefective:
dND =

i:T neg(i)> γ1Tν
k

(3.37)
for some thresholdγ 1. The remaining items, dPD ={1,...,n}\ dND, are
believed to be ‘possible defective’ items.
2. For eachj∈ dPD, let eTpos(j) be the number of positive tests that include
itemjand no other item from dPD. In the second step, we estimate the
defective set as follows:
ˆK=

i∈ dPD : eTpos(i)> γ2Tνe−ν
k

(3.38)
for some thresholdγ 2.
In the noiseless case, settingγ 1 =γ 2 = 0 recovers the standard DD algorithm,
Algorithm 2.3. For the addition noise model (Example 3.2), since negative test
outcomes are perfectly reliable, one can setγ 1 = 0. Similarly, for the Z channel
noise model Example 3.4, since positive test outcomes are perfectly reliable, one
can setγ 2 = 0. In fact, one of the main goals of [246] was to show that these two
noise models can behave quite differently in group testing despite corresponding
to channels with the same Shannon capacity.
Using concentration of measure results, it is possible to give exponential
tail bounds for error events corresponding to particular values ofγ 1 andγ 2.
This gives rise to a rate resembling the NCOMP one in (3.26), but with some
important modifications:
•The maximum is over bothγ 1 andγ 2, as well as an extra parameterξ
discussed below.
70CHAPTER 3. ALGORITHMS FOR NOISY GROUP TESTING
•There are four terms in the minimization instead of two, with the added
terms corresponding to the additional thresholding done in the second
step. Accordingly, the first two terms depend onγ 1 and the second two
terms depend onγ 2.
•An extra parameterξ∈(0,α) is introduced to represent the existence of
at mostn ξ ‘false positives’ in the first step, which is now permissible as
long as the second step corrects them.
By balancing these four terms, it is shown in [246] that at least in certain cases,
one can find expressions for the optimal values of these parameters, with the
help of the Lambert W function. The interested reader is referred to [246] for the
rate expressions both before and after optimizing parameters. We will provide
a rate plot for the symmetric noise model (Example 3.1) in Section 3.8, along
with some numerical experiments.
The strongest results among those in [246] are for the addition noise model
(Example 3.4), in which the achievability curve matches an algorithm-independent
converse for Bernoulli testing for a wide range ofα∈(0,1). In contrast, wider
gaps are observed for the Z channel and symmetric noise models. For each of
these models, the rate converges to the noiseless DD rate (Section 2.4) in the
low noise limit, though the convergence can be rather slow, with visible gaps
remaining even for low noise levels such as 0.001.
3.7 Improved rates with constant tests-per-item
Given the significant benefits of the near-constant tests-per-item design in the
noiseless setting, it is natural to ask whether this design also outperforms the
Bernoulli design in noisy settings. This question was addressed by Gebhardet
al.[133], though they chose to adopt the closely-relatedconstant tests-per-item
design, defined as follows.
Definition 3.4.Theconstant column weight(orconstant tests-per-item) design
with parameterν >0 forms a group testing matrixXin whichL=νT/kentries
of each column are selected uniformly at randomwithoutreplacement and set
to one, with independence between columns. The remaining entries ofXare set
to zero.
The only difference between this and Definition 2.3 is that the sampling here
is done without replacement, so all columns have weight exactlyL.
We first state the improved NCOMP bound from [133], which serves as a
counterpart to Theorem 3.3.
Theorem 3.5.Consider the NCOMP decoding rule(3.23)under the constant
column weight design with parameterL=νT/k, and suppose thatk= Θ(n α)
for someα∈(0,1). Moreover, consider the noise model from Example 3.5
in which tests with no defectives are flipped to1with probabilityρ 01 and tests
with defectives are flipped to0with probabilityρ 10, where the noise parameters
(ρ01,ρ 10)satisfyρ 01 +ρ 10 <1. Then, the following rate is achieved:
RNCOMP
CC = (1−α)ν
ln 2 max
γ∈(ρ10,w)
min
 1
αd(γ∥ρ 10), d(γ∥w)

,(3.39)
3.8. RATE COMPARISONS AND NUMERICAL SIMULATIONS71
0 0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8
Sparsity Parameter ,
0
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5Rate (bits/test)
0 0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8
Sparsity Parameter ,
0
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5Rate (bits/test)
Information-Theoretic
NDD
NCOMP
Information-Theoretic
NDD
NCOMP
Separate Decoding
Capacity
0 0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8
Sparsity Parameter ,
0
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5Rate (bits/test)
Information-Theoretic
NDD
NCOMP
Information-Theoretic
NDD
NCOMP
Separate Decoding
Capacity
0 0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8
Sparsity Parameter ,
0
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5Rate (bits/test)
Information-Theoretic
NDD
NCOMP
Information-Theoretic
NDD
NCOMP
Separate Decoding
Capacity
(Near-)constant
Bernoulli
Maximum achievable rate
NDD achievable rate
NCOMP achievable rate
Capacity bound
Maximum achievable rate
NDD achievable rate
NCOMP achievable rate
Separate decoding achievable rate
column weight
Figure 3.2: Achievable rates for the symmetric noise model with noise level
ρ= 0.11. The ‘maximum achievable rate’ curves are discussed in Section 4.6.2.
wherew=e −ν(1−ρ 01) + (1−e−ν)ρ10, and
d(p∥q) =plog p
q + (1−p) log 1−p
1−q
is the relative entropy between aBernoulli(p)and aBernoulli(q)random vari-
able.
The terms in (3.39) share exactly the same interpretation as those in (3.26),
but turn out to be different due to the different test design. It is shown in [133]
that
RNCOMP
CC ≥R NCOMP
Bern ,(3.40)
meaning that this achievable rate is always at least as high as its counterpart
for the Bernoulli design.
The main result of [133] is an achievable rate for the noisy DD algorithm,
which is omitted here but again shares a similar form and interpretation to its
Bernoulli counterpart discussed in Section 3.6. It is shown that the bound is at
least as strong as its Bernoulli counterpart under the Z channel noise (Example
3.4). It is not yet known whether such a result also holds for more general noise
models (such as symmetric or addition noise), but numerical evaluations suggest
that this may be the case.
3.8 Rate comparisons and numerical simulations
In this section, we compare the achievable rates of the algorithms considered
throughout this chapter, as well as comparing the algorithms numerically. We
focus here on the symmetric noise model (Definition 3.1) with parameterρ∈ 
0, 1
2

, since it has received the most attention in the context of proving achiev-
able rates for noisy group testing algorithms.
72CHAPTER 3. ALGORITHMS FOR NOISY GROUP TESTING
150 200 250 300 350 400 450
Number of tests
0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1
Success probability BP
LP
NDD
Separate
NCOMP
Figure 3.3: Experimental simulations for the symmetric noise model under
Bernoulli testing with parameterν= ln 2, withn= 500 items,k= 10 de-
fectives, and noise parameterρ= 0.05.
Rate comparisonsIn Figure 3.2, we plot the achievable rates of NCOMP
(the improved rates from Theorems 3.3 and 3.5), separate decoding of items, and
noisy DD with noise levelρ= 0.11, under both the Bernoulli and near-constant
column weight designs (except separate decoding whose existing analysis is spe-
cific to the Bernoulli design). We optimize the test design parameterν >0
separately for each curve, except separate decoding since its rate was proved
specifically forν= (ln 2)(1 +o(1)). We also plot the best possible rates for
these designs [58, 78], which we will cover in Section 4.6.2.
We observe that at least in the setting shown, the rates for separate decoding
of items and noisy DD are uniformly stronger than the rate proved for NCOMP.
For the Bernoulli design, separate decoding attains a higher rate for smallα,
whereas noisy DD attains a higher rate for largeα. While we only showed a
single noise level here, we note that the benefits of noisy DD compared to other
algorithms have been seen to increase at lower noise levels [246, 133].
Numerical simulationsIn Figure 3.3, we plot experimental simulation re-
sults under the symmetric noise model (Example 3.1) with parameterρ= 0.05,
and withn= 500 items andk= 10 defectives. We first consider i.i.d. Bernoulli
testing with parameterν= ln 2, along with the following decoding rules:
•Noisy linear programming (LP) as described in Section 3.2, with parameter
λ= 0.5 and eachu i rounded to the nearest integer in{0,1};
•Belief propagation (BP) as described in Section 3.3, with 10 message pass-
ing iterations;
•NCOMP as described in Section 3.4 (specifically, see (3.23)), with ∆ =
0.1(1−2ρ)
ρ based on the theoretical choice in [52] along with some manual
tuning of the constant factor;
3.8. RATE COMPARISONS AND NUMERICAL SIMULATIONS73
100 150 200 250 300
Number of Tests
0
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
0.6
0.7
0.8
0.9Success Probability BP (near-const.)
LP (near-const.)
BP (Bernoulli)
LP (Bernoulli)
Figure 3.4: Comparison of the Bernoulli and near-constant column weight de-
signs under the same setup as that of Figure 3.3.
•Separate decoding of items as described in Section 3.5, withγ= (1−
δ)I(X 1;Y) in accordance with the theoretical analysis, andδchosen based
on manual tuning to be 1
3;
•Noisy DD as described in Section 3.6, with parametersγ 1 =γ 2 = 0.175
based on manual tuning.
(In Section 4.6.2 we will discuss a spatially coupled test design and polynomial-
time decoder that achieves the optimal rate [78]; it is omitted here since, to our
knowledge, it is currently a construction that exists for theoretical purposes but
has not been implemented experimentally.)
We observe that BP performs best in this setup, followed closely by LP. There
is then a larger gap to noisy DD and separate decoding, and finally NCOMP
requires the most tests. While our experiments are far from being an exhaustive
treatment, these results indicate somewhat of a gap between the current theory
and practice, with the best-performing methods (BP and LP) also being the
least well-understood from a theoretical point of view. Closing this gap remains
an interesting direction for further research.
Next, we compare the Bernoulli design to the near-constant column weight
design. (We found the near-constant column weight and exactly-constant col-
umn weight designs to have nearly identical performance, so we only show the
former.) To avoid clutter, we focus on the two best-performing decoders, namely,
LP and BP. The results are shown in Figure 3.4, in which we use the same pa-
rameters as those above. Similarly to the noiseless setting, we see that the
near-constant column weight design is able to provide clear improvements over
the Bernoulli design.
Oracle versionsFinally, to better understand the impact of knowledge ofk
in noisy group testing, in Figure 3.5, we repeat the experiment of Figure 3.3
with ‘oracle’ versions of the algorithms for the case that the number of defectives
kis known:
74CHAPTER 3. ALGORITHMS FOR NOISY GROUP TESTING
150 200 250 300 350 400 450
Number of tests
0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1
Success probability BP
LP
NDD
Separate
NCOMP
Figure 3.5: Performance of oracle versions of the respective algorithms under
the same setup as that of Figure 3.3.
•Noisy LP includes the additional constraint that the estimated defectivity
indicator variablesz i sum tok.
•Instead of thresholding, BP chooses thekitems with the highest estimated
probabilities of being defective.
•NCOMP takes thekitems for which the proportions of positive tests
(relative to those the item is included in) are highest.
•Separate decoding of items chooses thekitems with the highest sum of
log-probability ratios (see (3.27)).
•Noisy DD estimates the ‘possible defectives’ to be the set of (1 + ∆)k
items in the lowest number of negative tests, where we set ∆ = 1
2 based
on manual tuning. The algorithm then estimates the defective set to be
the set ofkitems with the highest number of positive tests in which it is
the unique possible defective.
We observe that knowledge ofkbrings the performance of NCOMP, separate
decoding, and noisy DD closer together, but generally maintains their relative
order. On the other hand, the performance of LP improves more than that of
BP, making it become the best performing algorithm for most values ofT.
Chapter 4
Information-Theoretic
Limits
In this chapter, we present information-theoretic achievability and converse
bounds characterizing the fundamental limits of group testing regardless of the
computational complexity. We have already seen a few converse results in the
previous chapters, including the counting bound (Theorem 1.1) in the noiseless
setting, and a capacity-based bound for noisy settings (Theorem 3.1).
The main results presented in this chapter are as follows:
•an achievable rate for the noiseless setting under Bernoulli testing, which
matches or improves on all the algorithms considered in Chapter 2 (see
the discussion in Section 4.1 and the details in Section 4.2);
•a matching converse bound for the noiseless setting establishing the exact
maximum achievable rate of nonadaptive testing with a Bernoulli design
(Section 4.3);
•an improved achievable rate for the noiseless setting under a near-constant
column weight design (see the discussion in Section 4.1 and the details in
4.4);
•analogous achievability and converse bounds for noisy settings under the
Bernoulli design, and applications to specific models (Section 4.6).
4.1 Overview of the standard noiseless model
The first two major results in this chapter give achievable rates for noiseless
nonadaptive group testing with two different designs. Theorem 4.1, due to
Scarlett and Cevher [243, 241], concerns the Bernoulli design (see Definition 2.2),
and Theorem 4.2, due to Coja-Oghlanet al.[75], concerns the near-constant
column weight design (see Definition 2.3).
Theorem 4.1.Consider noiseless nonadaptive group testing, under the exact
recovery criterion in the small error setting, andk= Θ(n α)defectives with
75
76CHAPTER 4. INFORMATION-THEORETIC LIMITS
α∈(0,1). Then the rate
RBern = max
ν>0
min

h(e−ν), νe−ν
ln 2
1−α
α

(4.1)
is achievable, and can be achieved by a Bernoulli test design.
Theorem 4.2.Consider noiseless nonadaptive group testing, under the exact
recovery criterion in the small error setting, andk= Θ(n α)defectives with
α∈(0,1). Then the rate
RNCC = min

1,(ln 2) 1−α
α

(4.2)
is achievable, and can be achieved by a near-constant column weight design with
ν= ln 2.
This rate corresponds to a number of tests satisfying the following for arbi-
trarily smallη >0:T≥(1 +η) max

klog 2
n
k, 1
(ln 2)2klnk
	
.
We will shortly see (in Figure 4.1) thatRNCC≥RBern, with strict inequality
whenα > 1
3. Moreover, in Theorems 4.5 and 4.6 later in the chapter, we will
further see that these rates are the best possible for their respective designs,
by establishingdesign-specific converse bounds. Thus, (4.1) and (4.2) serve as
exact thresholds giving the best possible rates for these designs.
However, these results collectively still fall short of answering two important
questions: (i) Are there other nonadaptive designs that can achieve even better
rates? (ii) Forα < 1
2, can the stronger rate RNCC be achieved using a com-
putationally efficient decoder? (Forα≥ 1
2 it is achieved by the DD algorithm;
see Theorem 2.8.) These questions were completely answered by Coja-Oghlan
et al.[76], with Theorem 4.3 below answering question (i) in the negative by
showing that RNCC is optimal, and Theorem 4.4 below answering question (ii)
in the affirmative as long as a modified test design is allowed. Section 5.9 out-
lines the challenges of attaining optimal rates forα< 1
2 with efficient decoding
using the Bernoulli and near-constant column weight designs.
Theorem 4.3.Consider noiseless nonadaptive group testing, under the exact
recovery criterion in the small error setting, andk= Θ(n α)defectives withα∈
(0,1). Then regardless of the test design and decoding strategy, it is impossible
to achieve any rate higher than RNCC defined in(4.2).
Theorem 4.4.Consider noiseless nonadaptive group testing, under the exact
recovery criterion in the small error setting, andk= Θ(n α)defectives with
α∈(0,1). Then there exists a test design and decoder that attains the rate
RNCC defined in(4.2), and whose decoding time is polynomial with respect ton.
Theorem 4.1 is proved in Section 4.2 using information-theoretic methods
akin to those used in studies of channel coding. We dedicate a large section
of this chapter to the study of this proof, as the information theory approach
is a powerful and flexible method that can be applied to other sparse inference
problems (see [243]), and in particular to noisy group testing models (see Section
4.6). The proof of Theorem 4.2 uses a more direct probabilistic method to show
that there exists only one satisfying set (see Definition 2.1) with high probability
4.1. OVER VIEW OF THE STANDARD NOISELESS MODEL77
Maximum achievable rate
DD achievable rate
COMP achievable rate
0.25 0.5 0.75 10
0.25
0.5
0.75
1
0
Rate
Bernoulli
Near-constant
column weight
Maximum achievable rate
DD achievable rate
COMP achievable rate
Counting bound
Sparsity parameter α
Figure 4.1: Rate for nonadaptive group testing in the sparse regime with a
Bernoulli design and with a near-constant column weight designs.
– arguably a simpler strategy, but one that may be harder to generalize to other
models. We discuss this proof in Section 4.4. The proof of Theorem 4.3 is
outlined in Section 4.5.1, and is based on the idea of identifying many items
that aremaskedin the sense that they only appear in tests that contain other
defectives. The proof of Theorem 4.4 is relatively complicated, so in Section
4.5.2 we primarily focus on describing the test design and decoding rule, only
giving hints on the proof techniques. The test design is based on the idea of
spatial coupling; while this is a well-known technique in error-correcting coding,
its application to group testing is far from trivial.
Discussion of the ratesThe rates are shown in Figure 4.1, which is a repeat
of Figure 2.1 included here for convenience. We see that forα≤1/3, both
theorems give an equal rate of 1, while forα >1/3, the rate (4.2) for near-
constant column weight designs is slightly higher than the rate (4.1) for Bernoulli
designs, in particular equalling 1 forα≤0.409.
The rate expression in (4.1) is somewhat complicated. It will become ap-
parent in the forthcoming proof of Theorem 4.1 that the parameterνenters
through the choice of the Bernoulli parameter asp=ν/k. It is easy to see that
the first minimand of (4.1) is maximized atν= ln 2, and is the value ofpthat
corresponds to (asymptotically) half of the tests being positive. By differenti-
ation, we see that the second minimand of (4.1) is maximized atν= 1, which
corresponds top= 1/k, and is the value ofpthat corresponds to an average
of one defective per test. Using these findings, we can check that the following
simplification of (4.1) holds:
RBern =



1 forα≤1/3
as in (4.1) for 1/3<α<0.359
0.531 1−α
α forα≥0.359,
where it should be understood that the decimal values are non-exact (rounded
78CHAPTER 4. INFORMATION-THEORETIC LIMITS
to three decimal places).
The near-constant column weight design withL=νT/ktests per item is
always optimized withν= ln 2, which corresponds to (asymptotically) half of
the tests being positive. This makes the expression (4.2) simpler, and we have
RNCC =



1 forα≤0.409,
0.693 1−α
α forα>0.409.
Thus, we see that nonadaptive group testing achieves the rate 1 of the count-
ing bound (see Section 1.4) and has the same rate as adaptive testing forα≤1/3
with a Bernoulli design and forα≤0.409 with a near-constant column weight
design. On the other hand, forαabove these thresholds, the rates are strictly
below the counting bound. Since the counting bound can be achieved for all
α∈(0,1) using adaptive designs (Section 1.5) and the near-constant column
weight design attains the optimal rate among nonadaptive designs (Theorem
4.3), we conclude that there is a strict gap between the optimal adaptive and
nonadaptive rates forα>0.409.
Other related workBefore continuing, we briefly review work on achievable
rates for noiseless nonadaptive group testing that preceded Theorems 4.1 and
4.2 (although these papers did not necessarily phrase their results this way).
We begin with results using Bernoulli test designs.
Freidlina [121] and Malyutov [212] showed that a rate of 1 is achievable
in the very sparse regime wherekis constant asn→∞. Malyutov used an
information-theoretic approach based on a multiple access channel model with
one input for each defective item. Seb˝ o [248] also attained a rate of 1 for constant
kusing a more direct probabilistic method.
Atia and Saligrama [24] reignited interest in the use of information-theoretic
methods for studying group testing. They used a model of channel coding with
correlated codewords, where each potential defective set is a message (recall the
channel coding interpretation of group testing shown in Figure 1.1). Atia and
Saligrama showed that, in the limiting regime wherek→∞aftern→∞, one
can succeed withT=O(klogn) tests, although they did not specify the implicit
constant. Effectively, in our notation, this shows a nonzero rate forα= 0, but
does not prove the Freidlina–Malyutov–Seb˝ o rate of 1. They also showed that
T=O(klognlog 2k) suffices for anyk=o(n), though this falls short of proving
a nonzero rate forα∈(0,1). They also gave order-wise results for some noisy
models. A similar approach to Atia and Saligrama was taken by Scarlett and
Cevher [243] (outlined below), but with tighter analysis and careful calculation
of constants giving the better rates of Theorem 4.1.
Aldridge, Baldassini, and Gunderson [15] generalized Seb˝ o’s approach to all
α∈[0,1), showing a nonzero rate for allαthat achieves the rate of 1 atα= 0,
but that is suboptimal compared to (4.1) forα∈(0,1).
In Chapter 2 of this monograph, we saw some rates that can be achieved
with practical algorithms. Chanet al.[52, 53] were the first to show a nonzero
rate for allα∈(0,1), albeit one that is suboptimal compared to (4.1), by
analysing the COMP algorithm (Theorem 2.3). They also showed nonzero rates
for some non-Bernoulli designs. The DD algorithm of Aldridge, Baldassini, and
Johnson [16] also achieves nonzero rates for allα∈(0,1) with Bernoulli testing,
in particular matching (4.1) forα>1/2 (Theorem 2.4).
4.2. PROOF OF ACHIEV ABLE RATE FOR BERNOULLI TESTING79
We also saw in Section 2.7 that the performance of these algorithms is im-
proved when used with the near-constant column weight design. In particular,
the DD algorithm achieves the same rate as (4.2) forα≥1/2, as shown by
Johnson, Aldridge and Scarlett [170]. We direct the reader back to Chapter 2
for detailed discussions of these results and other algorithms.
M´ ezard, Tarzia and Toninelli [218] had suggested that Theorem 4.2 should
be true by appealing to heuristics from statistical physics – the innovation of
Coja-Oghlanet al.[75] was to prove this rigorously.
4.2 Proof of achievable rate for Bernoulli testing
4.2.1 Discussion of proof techniques
Our proof follows Scarlett and Cevher [243], who proved Theorem 4.1 as a
special case of a more general framework for noiseless and noisy group test-
ing. The analysis is based onthresholding techniquesthat are rooted in early
information-theoretic works, such as [116, 253], as well as recent developments
in information-spectrum methods [149]. In fact, we also saw a simpler version
of this approach when studying separate decoding of items in Section 3.5.
To describe these methods in more detail, we momentarily depart from the
group testing problem and consider a simple channel coding scenario whereM
codewords are drawn from some distributionP X, and one of them is transmit-
ted over a channelP Y|X to produce an output sequencey. The optimal (yet
generally computationally intractable) decoding rule chooses the codewordx
maximizing the likelihoodP Y|X(y|x), and the resulting error probability is up-
per bounded by the probability that the true codeword is the only one such that
log2
PY|X(y|x)
PY(y) exceeds a suitably-chosen threshold. Intuitively, we should expect
PY|X(y|x) to be considerably larger thanP Y(y) whenxis the true transmitted
codeword, whereas ifxis an incorrect codeword then this is unlikely to be the
case.
More precisely, by a simple change of measure technique, the probability
of log 2
PY|X(y|x)
PY(y) exceeding any thresholdγfor a single non-transmitted code-
word is at most 2 −γ, and hence the union of these events across allM−1
non-transmitted codewords has probability at most (M−1)2 −γ. Choosingγ
slightly larger than log2Mensures that this probability is small, and hence the
error probability is roughly the probability that the true codewordxfails the
threshold test, i.e., log 2
PY|X(y|x)
PY(y) <γ≈log 2M.
Finally, for a memoryless channel taking the formPY|X(y|x) =Qn
i=1PY|X (yi|xi),
and an i.i.d. codeword distribution of the formP X(x) = Qn
i=1PX(xi), the
quantity log 2
PY|X(y|x)
PY(y) concentrates about its meannI(X;Y). As a result,
we get vanishing error probability when the number of codewords satisfies
M≲2 nI(X;Y) , and we can achieve any coding rate up to the mutual infor-
mationI(X;Y).
For group testing, we follow the same general idea, but with a notable change:
the ‘codewords’ (that is, theT×ksubmatricesX K of the test matrix forKof
cardinalityk) are not independent. For example, the codewords corresponding
toK 1 ={1,2,3}and{K 2}={1,4,7}have a common first column. To handle
this issue, we treat different incorrect codewords separately depending on their
80CHAPTER 4. INFORMATION-THEORETIC LIMITS
amount of overlap with the true codeword: If there is no overlap then the
analysis is similar to that of channel coding above, while if there is overlap then
we consider probabilities of the form log 2
P1(y|·)
P2(y|·), whereP 1 conditions on the
true codeword, andP 2 only conditions on the overlapping part.
We now proceed with the proof of Theorem 4.1. We first introduce some
notation that will allow the initial steps to be re-used for the noisy setting, then
formally specify the decoder used, provide the non-asymptotic bound that forms
the starting point of the analysis, and finally, outline the subsequent asymptotic
analysis that leads to the final result.
4.2.2 Information-theoretic notation
While our focus is primarily on the noiseless setting, the initial steps of the anal-
ysis are just as easily done simultaneously for general noise models. Specifically,
we consider an arbitrary model studying the ‘only defects matter’ property,
given in Definition 3.2. Due to this property and the symmetry in the random
construction ofX, the analysis will not be impacted by the realization ofK, and
we will therefore setK={1,...,k}without loss of generality.
We now introduce some notation. We again consider the Bernoulli design
(Definition 2.2), in which each item is included in each test independently with
probabilityp. For convenience, we writep=ν/kfor someν >0, and as usual
theT×ntest matrix is denoted byX.
The submatrixX K denotes only the columns of the matrixXindexed by
K, andX K denotes a single row ofX K. We writeV=V(X K) for the random
number of defective items in the test indicated byX.
The observationY∈{0,1}is generated according to some general distribu-
tionP Y|XK depending onX K only throughV:
(Y|X,K)∼P Y|XK =P Y|V .(4.3)
This is precisely the only defects matter property of Definition 3.2. TheT-
fold product ofP Y|XK gives the distribution of the overall test vectorY=
(Y1,...,Y T ) givenXK, and is denoted byP Y|XK.
As discussed above, we consider separate error events according to how much
an incorrect defective setK ′ overlaps withK. To facilitate this, for a given
partition (S0,S 1) ofK, we write
PY|XS0,XS1
(y|x S0,xS1) =P Y|XK(y|x K),(4.4)
and use this to define the marginal distribution
PY|XS1
(y|xS1) =
X
xS0
PXS0
(xS0)PY|XS0,XS1
(y|x S0,xS1),(4.5)
where (xS0,xS1,y) is a specific realization of (X S0,XS1,Y). In the analysis,
S1 will represent the intersectionK∩K ′ between the defective setKand some
incorrect setK ′, whereasS 0 will represent the set differenceK\K ′.
Finally, in accordance with the techniques outlined in Section 4.2.1, we define
theinformation density
ı(XS0;Y|X S1) = log2
PY|XS0,XS1
(y|X S0,XS1)
PY|XS1
(Y|X S1) ,(4.6)
4.2. PROOF OF ACHIEV ABLE RATE FOR BERNOULLI TESTING81
and letı T (XS0;Y|XS1) be theT-letter extension obtained by summing (4.6)
over theTtests. Since the tests are independent, writing the sum of logarithms
as the logarithm of a product yields
ıT (XS0;Y|X S1) = log2
PY|XS0,XS1
(Y|X S0,XS1)
PY|XS1
(Y|X S1) .(4.7)
We also note that the expectation of (4.6) is equal to the conditional mu-
tual informationI(X S0;Y|X S1), and the expectation of (4.7) is equal to
T·I(X S0;Y|X S1).
4.2.3 Choice of decoder
Inspired by classical information-theoretic works such as [116] (again see Section
4.2.1), we consider a decoder that searches for a defective setK⊆{1,...,n}of
cardinalityksuch that
ıT (XS0;Y|X S1)>γ |S0| for all (S 0,S 1) partitioningKwithS 0̸=∅(4.8)
for suitable constantsγ 1,...,γ K to be chosen later. If no such set exists, or if
multiple sets exist, then an error is declared.
The rule (4.8) can be viewed as a weakened version of the maximum-likelihood
(ML) rule – that is, the decoder that chooses the setKmaximizingP Y|XK.
Specifically, if a unique set satisfies (4.8), it must be the ML choice, whereas
sometimes the ML decoder might succeed where the above decoder fails – for
example, in cases where noKpasses all 2 k−1 of its threshold tests.
The above decoder is unlikely to be computationally feasible in practice
even for moderate problem sizes. The focus in this section is on information-
theoretic achievability regardless of such considerations. Moreover, while this
rule requires knowledge ofk, we argue in Section 4.3 that at least in the noiseless
setting, the resulting rate can be achieved even without this knowledge.
4.2.4 Non-asymptotic bound
Observe that in order for an error to occur, it must be the case that either the
true defective setK={1,...,k}fails one of the threshold tests in (4.8), or some
incorrect setK ′ passes all of the threshold tests. As a result, the union bound
gives
P(err)≤P
 [
(S0,S1)

ıT (XS0;Y|X S1)≤γ |S0|
	
+
X
K′̸=K
P

ıT (XK′\K;Y|X K∩K′)>γ |K′\K|

,
(4.9)
where in the first term the union is implicitly subject to the conditions in (4.8),
and in the second term, we upper bound the probability of passing all threshold
tests by the probability of passing a single one (namely, the one withS 1 =
K∩K ′).
82CHAPTER 4. INFORMATION-THEORETIC LIMITS
Using the form ofı T in (4.7), we can upper bound any given summand of
(4.9) as follows withS 0 =K′\K,S 1 =K∩K ′, andτ=|K ′\K|:
P

ıT (XK′\K;Y|X K∩K′)>γ τ

(4.10)
=
X
XS0,XS1,y
P(XS0,XS1)PY|XS1
(y|X S1)
×1

log2
PY|XS0,XS1
(y|X S0,XS1)
PY|XS1
(y|X S1) >γ τ
 (4.11)
≤
X
XS0,XS1,y
P(XS0,XS1)PY|XS0,XS1
(y|X S0,XS1)2−γτ (4.12)
= 2−γτ.(4.13)
Here, (4.11) follows since the observations depend onX K′ only through the
columnsS 1 =K∩K ′ overlapping withK, (4.12) follows by upper bounding
PY|XS1
(y|X S1) according to the event in the indicator function and then upper
bounding the indicator function by one, and (4.13) follows from the fact that
we are summing a joint distribution over all of its values.
Combining (4.9) and (4.13), and also applying the union bound in the first
term of the former, we obtain
P(err)≤
X
(S0,S1)
P

ıT (XS0;Y|X S1)≤γ |S0|

+
X
K′̸=K
2−γ|K′\K|.
where we have applied the definitionτ=|K ′\K|. By counting the number of
S0⊂Kof cardinalityτ∈{1,...,k}, as well as the number ofK ′̸=Ksuch that
|K′\K|=τ∈{1,...,k}, we can simplify the above bound to
P(err)≤
kX
τ=1
k
τ

P

ıT (X0,τ;Y|X 1,τ)≤γ τ

+
kX
τ=1
k
τ
n−k
τ

2−γτ,(4.14)
whereX 0,τ =X S0 andX 1,τ =X S1 for an arbitrary partition (S0,S 1) of{1,...,k}
with|S 0|=τ; by the i.i.d. test design and model assumption (4.3), the proba-
bility in (4.14) is the same for any such partition.
Finally, choosing
γτ = log2
k
 k
τ
 n−k
τ

δ
for someδ >0, we obtain the non-asymptotic bound
P(err)≤
kX
τ=1
k
τ

P

ıT (X0,τ;Y|X 1,τ)≤log 2
k
 k
τ
 n−k
τ

δ

+δ.(4.15)
4.2.5 Characterizing the tail probabilities
The next step is to characterize the probability appearing on the right-hand side
of (4.15). The idea is to note that this is the tail probability of an i.i.d. sum,
and hence we should expect some concentration around the mean. Recall from
4.2. PROOF OF ACHIEV ABLE RATE FOR BERNOULLI TESTING83
Section 4.2.2 that the mean of the information density is the conditional mutual
information:
E

ıT (X0,τ;Y|X 1,τ)

=T·I(X 0,τ;Y|X 1,τ) =:T·I τ,(4.16)
where (X0,τ,X 1,τ) correspond to single rows in (X 0,τ,X 1,τ), andYis the cor-
responding entry ofY. The following lemma characterizesI τ for the noiseless
model; we return to the noisy setting in Section 4.6.
Lemma 4.1.Under the noiseless group testing model using Bernoulli testing
with probabilityp=ν/kfor some fixedν >0, the conditional mutual informa-
tionI τ behaves as follows ask→∞:
1. Ifτ/k→0, then
Iτ∼e−νντ
k log2
k
τ.
2. Ifτ/k→ψ∈(0,1], then
Iτ∼e−(1−ψ)νh(e−ψν),
whereh(ψ)is the binary entropy function.
Proof.In the noiseless setting, we haveI(X 0,τ;Y|X 1,τ) =H(Y|X 1,τ). IfX 1,τ
contains any ones, then the conditional entropy ofYis zero, and otherwise, the
conditional entropy is the binary entropy function evaluated at the conditional
probability ofY= 1. Evaluating these probabilities explicitly, we obtain
Iτ = (1−p) k−τh
 
(1−p) τ
=

1− ν
k
k−τ
h

1− ν
k
τ
.
In the case thatτ/k→0, the lemma now follows from the asymptotic
expressions (1−ν/k) k−τ→e−ν and (1−ν/k) τ∼1−ντ/k, as well ash(1−a)∼
−alog 2aasa→0.
In the case thatτ/k→ψ∈(0,1], the lemma follows from the limits (1−
ν/k)k−τ →e −(1−ψ)ν and (1−ν/k) τ →e −ψν, as well as the continuity of
entropy.
We now fix a set of constantsδ ′
τ forτ= 1,...,k, and observe that as long
as
T≥ log2
 n−k
τ

+ log2
 k
δ
 k
τ

(1−δ ′τ)Iτ
,(4.17)
we can upper bound the probability in (4.15) by
P
 
ıT (X0,τ;Y|X 1,τ)<(1−δ ′
τ)TIτ

.(4.18)
As mentioned above,ı T is a sum ofTi.i.d. random variables having meanI τ,
and as a result, we can bound (4.18) using concentration inequalities.
In fact, in the case thatkis constant (that is, not growing withn), it suffices
to use Chebyshev’s inequality to show that each term of the form (4.18) vanishes
for arbitrarily smallδ ′
τ [241]. Since each such term vanishes, then so does the
weighted sum of all such terms in (4.15) (using the fact thatkis constant), and
84CHAPTER 4. INFORMATION-THEORETIC LIMITS
we are left only with the sufficient condition in (4.17) forP(err)≤δ+o(1). By
takingδ→0 sufficiently slowly, we are left with the condition
T≥max
τ=1,...,k
log2
 n−k
τ

Iτ
(1 +o(1))
forP(err)→0.
However, our main interest is not in the fixed-kregime, but in the regime
k= Θ(n α) forα∈(0,1). In this case, more sophisticated concentration bounds
are needed, and these turn out to introduce extra requirements onTbeyond
(4.17) alone.
Lemma 4.2.Setτ ∗ =k/log 2k. Under Bernoulli group testing with probability
p=ν/k, the quantitiesı τ,T :=ı T (X0,τ;Y|X 1,τ)satisfy the following concen-
tration bounds provided that the quantitiesδ ′
τ are uniformly bounded away from
zero and one:
1. Forτ≤τ ∗, we have
P
 
ıτ,T <TI τ(1−δ ′
τ)

≤exp

−T τ
k e−νν
 
(1−δ ′
τ) log2(1−δ ′
τ) +δ′
τ

(1 +o(1))

.
2. Forτ >τ ∗, we have
P
 
ıτ,T <TI τ(1−δ ′
τ)

≤2 exp

− (δ′
τIτ)2T
4(8 +δ′τIτ)

.
Proof.The first bound is proved by lower boundingi τ,T by a scaled binomial
random variable and applying a well-known concentration bound specific to the
binomial distribution. The second bound is proved using Bernstein’s inequality.
The details can be found in [243].
The remainder of the proof amounts to rather tedious yet elementary al-
gebraic manipulations, and we therefore provide only an outline. We start by
choosing chooseδ ′
τ = 1−ϵforτ≤τ ∗, andδ ′
τ =ϵforτ > τ ∗, whereϵ >0 is
arbitrarily small.
The first requirement onTis that it satisfies (4.17) for allτ= 1,...,k.
Using Lemma 4.1 and the preceding choices ofδ ′
τ, one can show that the value
ofτthat gives the most stringent requirement onTisτ=k, at least in the
asymptotic limit. As a result, we get the condition
T≥

klog 2
n
k
 
1 +O(ϵ) +o(1)

.(4.19)
This arises from the fact that the numerator in (4.17) withτ=kis dominated
by log2
 n−k
k

, which behaves as
 
klog 2
n
k

(1 +o(1)) wheneverk=o(n).
The second requirement onTis that, upon substituting the bounds of
Lemma 4.2 into (4.15) and takingδ→0, the resulting summation on the right-
hand side vanishes. For this to be true, it suffices that both the summations over
τ∈{1,...,τ ∗}andτ∈{τ ∗ + 1,...,k}vanish. The second of these (the ‘small
overlap’ case) turns out to already vanish under the condition in (4.19). On the
4.3. CONVERSE BOUND FOR BERNOULLI TESTING85
other hand, after some rearranging and asymptotic simplifications, we find that
the first of these summations (the ‘large overlap’ case) vanishes provided that
T≥
 α
1−αklog 2
n
k
νe−ν
!
 
1 +O(ϵ) +o(1)

.(4.20)
Theorem 4.1 follows by combining these bounds and takingϵ→0.
4.3 Converse bound for Bernoulli testing
We have seen that nonadaptive Bernoulli matrix designs achieve a rate of 1 bit
per test wheneverα≤ 1
3, thus matching the counting bound and proving their
asymptotic optimality. On the other hand, forα∈
  1
3,1

, there remains a gap
between the two, with the gap growing larger asαapproaches one.
A priori, there are several possible reasons for the remaining gaps: the anal-
ysis in Section 4.2 could be loose, the use of Bernoulli tests could be suboptimal,
or the counting bound itself could be loose. The following result, due to Aldridge
[10], rules out the first of these, showing that Theorem 4.1 provides the best
rate that one could hope for given that Bernoulli designs are used.
Theorem 4.5.Consider noiseless group testing in the sparse regimek=
Θ(nα), with the exact recovery criterion, and Bernoulli testing. If the rate ex-
ceedsRBern defined in(4.1), then the error probability averaged over the testing
matrix is bounded away from zero, regardless of the decoding algorithm.
Proof.The idea of the proof is as follows. First, we argue that if both the
COMP and SSS (see Chapter 2) algorithms fail, then any algorithm fails with a
certain probability. Second, we argue that for rates above RBern, both COMP
and SSS fail.
Let ˆKCOMP and ˆKSSS be the sets returned by COMP and SSS, respectively.
Recall that these are respectively the largest (see Lemma 2.1) and smallest satis-
fying sets, where a satisfying set is any putative set of defective items that could
have produced the observed output (see Definition 2.1). The key observation
is that if| ˆKCOMP|> kand| ˆKSSS|< k, then there exist at least two satisfying
setsLwith|L|=k; any such set can be found by adding elements of ˆKCOMP to
ˆKSSS until reaching sizek. Then, even ifkis known, the best one can do given
multiple such sets is to choose one arbitrarily, yielding an error probability of
at least 1/2. Thus,
P(err)≥ 1
2 P
 
| ˆKCOMP|>k∩| ˆKSSS|<k

≥ 1
2
 
1−P(| ˆKCOMP|=k)−P(| ˆKSSS|=k)

(4.21)
by the union bound.
We handle the two above terms separately. First, we observe thatP(|ˆKCOMP|=
k) is precisely the probability of COMP succeeding, since the largest satisfying
set is necessarily unique (see Lemma 2.1). In Remark 2.2, it was shown that
the success probability of COMP tends to zero for rates above the valueR COMP
Bern
defined in (2.8), which is strictly less than the rate RBern that we consider here.
Second,{| ˆKSSS|=k}cannot occur when a defective item is masked, and such
86CHAPTER 4. INFORMATION-THEORETIC LIMITS
a masking event was shown to occur with probability bounded away from zero
in the proof of Theorem 2.2. Combining these two results, we find that (4.21)
is bounded away from 0, which completes the proof.
4.4 Improved rates with near-constant tests-per-
item
In Section 2.7, we saw that the near-constant column weight (or near-constant
tests-per-item) design introduced in Definition 2.3 gives improved rates for the
COMP and DD algorithms, and that the SSS algorithm cannot attain a higher
rate than min

1,ln 2 1−α
α
	
.
Similarly to the Bernoulli design, the converse of min

1,ln 2 1−α
α
	
bits per
test for SSS under the near-constant column weight design matches the achiev-
ability result for the DD algorithm stated in Theorem 2.8 whenα≥1/2. In
this section, we describe a recent development that extends the achievability
of the preceding rate toallα∈(0,1), albeit at the expense of (potentially
considerably) increased computation compared to DD.
Formally, the main result of Coja-Oghlanet al.[75] proves that the near-
constant column weight design has a maximum achievable rate of
RNCC = min

1,(ln 2) 1−α
α

,
as we stated in Theorem 4.2 above. We refrain from presenting the full details
of the somewhat lengthy proof of Theorem 4.2, but we sketch the main steps.
On the whole, the analysis is less based on tools from information theory,
and more based on direct probabilistic arguments. (Coja-Oghlanet al.note
that similar arguments have been successful in the theory of constraint satisfac-
tion problems.) Nevertheless, some similarities do exist between this approach
and the information-theoretic analysis of Section 4.2. Notably, the error events
associated with incorrect defective sets are handled separately according to the
amount of difference with the true defective set. The error events correspond-
ing to a small overlap (that is, an incorrect set having relatively few items in
common withK) have low probability for rates up to 1, and the error events
corresponding to a large overlap (a large number of items in common) have low
probability for rate up to (ln 2)1−α
α after the application of a tight concentration
bound.
Proof sketch of Theorem 4.2.Consider the number of satisfying sets ˆKof the
correct size| ˆK|=kthat have a set difference with the true defective set of size
|K\ ˆK|=| ˆK\K|=τ. Clearly there is one such set withτ= 0, namely, the
true defective set. If it can be shown that with high probability there are no
others, then the true defective set is the only satisfying set, and can – at least
given enough computation time – be found reliably. Different bounds are used
depending on whetherτ≥τ ∗ orτ <τ ∗, where we chooseτ ∗ =k/log 2n.
Similarly to the Bernoulli design, we may assume thatKis fixed, sayK=
{1,...,k}, without loss of generality. We first consider the ‘small overlap’ (or
‘large difference’) case, whereτ≥τ ∗. LetSbe the event that there exists a
4.4. IMPROVED RATES WITH NEAR-CONSTANT TESTS-PER-ITEM87
satisfying set corresponding to such aτ. Using the union bound, we have
P(S)≤
kX
τ=τ∗
n−k
τ
k
τ

P
  ˆKτ is satisfying

(4.22)
where ˆKτ is any set of sizekcontainingτnondefectives andk−τdefectives.
In [75], a concentration result and a coupling argument is used to show that
the bound (4.22) for the near-constant column weight design is very close to the
analogous bound for the Bernoulli design. This means that we can treat this case
as though we were using the Bernoulli(p) design, wherep= 1−e −ν/k∼ν/k.
Pickν= ln 2, so 1−p= 2 −1/k. (Here we follow an argument from [15].) A
test has a different result under ˆKτ compared toKif no item inKis tested but
an item in ˆKτ\Kis tested, or vice versa. This has probability
2(1−p) k 
1−(1−p) τ
= 2(1−p) k−2(1−p) k+τ.
Hence,
P
  ˆKτ is satisfying

=
 
1−2(1−p) k + 2(1−p) k+τT
,
and, using (1−p) k = 1
2, we have
P(S)≤
kX
τ=τ∗
n−k
τ
k
τ
 
1−2(1−p) k + 2(1−p) k+τT
=
kX
τ=τ∗
n−k
τ
k
τ

1−2· 1
2 + 2· 1
2
 
2−1/kτT
=
kX
τ=τ∗
n−k
τ
k
τ

2−τT/k.
One can check that the summands here are decreasing, so the largest term is
that forτ=τ ∗, and for anyδ >0 we haveτ ∗ < δkfornsufficiently large.
Hence, we have
P(S)≤k
n−k
δk
k
δk

2−δkT/k
≤k
en
δk
δk e
δ
δk
2−δT
=k2−δ(T−klog 2(n/k)−2(log2 e−log2δ)k).
We see forT >(1 +η)klog 2(n/k), which corresponds to any rate up to 1, that
P(S) can be made arbitrarily small.
Next, we consider the ‘large overlap’ (or ‘small difference’) case, whereτ <
τ∗. The union bound argument above is too weak here, as ‘rare solution-rich
instances drive up the expected number of solutions’ [75]. Instead, we first
show that a certain propertyRholds with high probability, and then use the
expansion properties of the near-constant column weight design to show that,
with high probability, no large-overlap solutions exist whenRholds.
PropertyRis the event that every defective itemi∈Kis the unique defec-
tive item in at leastδLtests, for someδ >0. We need to show thatRholds
88CHAPTER 4. INFORMATION-THEORETIC LIMITS
with high probability. To simplify this proof sketch, we present the analysis
as though each itemiwere included in exactlyL=νT/ktests chosenwithout
replacement (rather than with replacement). Each of theseLtests contains no
other defective items with probability

1− 1
T
L(k−1)
=

1− 1
T
νT(1−1/k)
→e−ν.
For further simplification here (with the full details given in [75]), we make
another non-rigorous approximation and suppose that each such test contains
no other defectives with probability exactly e −ν, and that this event is inde-
pendent across tests. WriteM i
d
≈Bin(L,e −ν) for the number of tests in which
iis the unique defective. Then the probability this is fewer thanδLtests is
(approximately)
P(Mi <δL)≈P
 
Bin(L,e−ν)<δL

≤2−Ld(δ∥e−ν),
whered(p∥q) is the relative entropy between a Bernoulli(p) and a Bernoulli(q)
random variable, and we have used the standard Chernoff bound for the binomial
distribution. It is clearly advantageous to takeδas small as possible, and doing
so yields
d(δ∥e−ν) =h(δ)−
 
δlog 2 e−ν + (1−δ) log 2(1−e −ν)

→−log 2(1−e −ν).
We can then use a union bound to write
P(R) =P
 \
i∈K
Mi≥δL
!
≤1−kP(M i <δL)
≲1−k2 Llog 2(1−e−ν)
= 1−2 −(−νlog 2(1−e−ν)T/k−log 2k),
where we substitutedL=νT/k. The preceding bound can be made to approach
1 provided that
T >(1 +η) 1
−νlog 2(1−e −ν)klog 2k
for some smallη >0. The term−νlog 2(1−e −ν) is maximized atν= ln 2,
where it takes the value ln 2. Hence, the preceding condition reduces to
T >(1 +η) 1
ln 2klog 2k,
which corresponds to rates no larger than (ln 2) 1−α
α .
It remains to argue that, conditioned on the eventR, we have no small-
difference satisfying sets with high probability. The key observation of [75] is
that switching even a single item from defective to nondefective would change
the result of a large number (at leastδL) of formerly positive tests. But turning
these tests back positive requires switching many items from nondefective to
4.5. GENERAL CONVERSE AND POLYNOMIAL-TIME STRATEGIES89
defective, because the expansion properties of the design imply that it is unlikely
that any item will be able to cover many of these tests. These switches in turn
change the result of many more tests, requiring more switches, and so on. Hence,
to get another satisfying set, one must switch the status of many items, and no
‘large overlap’ set can exist. While this is only an intuitive argument, it is
formalized in [75].
Together, we have establishing vanishing probability for the existence of
satisfying sets with either a small overlap or a large overlap (with ‘small’ and
‘large’ collectively covering all cases), and we are done.
The use of the near-constant column weight design was crucial in checking
that propertyRholds with high probability. Suppose that we instead use a
Bernoulli(ν/k) design; then, the probability that a defective item is the unique
defective in a given tests is
p(1−p) k−1 = ν
k

1− ν
k
k−1
∼ νe−ν
k .
Hence, the probability of being the unique defective item in fewer thanδL=
δνT/ktests is
P
 
Bin(T,νe−ν/k)<δνT/k)≤2 −Td(δν/k∥νe −ν/k).
Again, takingδas small as possible, we have
d(δν/k∥νe −ν/k)∼log 2(1−νe −ν/k)∼ 1
ln 2
νe−ν
k .
Following the same argument leads to the conclusion that we avoid large-overlap
errors with rates up to νe−ν
ln 2
1−α
α , as in (4.1). Thus, we see that the achievable
rate for Bernoulli designs (Theorem 4.1) can also be proved using the approach
of [75].
We can match the achievability result of Theorem 4.2 with a converse for
near-constant column weight designs. In particular, the proof of the correspond-
ing result for Bernoulli designs (Theorem 4.5) extends easily to the near-constant
column weight design once Theorem 2.9 on the SSS algorithm is in place. This
extension is stated formally as follows for completeness.
Theorem 4.6.Consider noiseless group testing in the sparse regimek=
Θ(nα), with the exact recovery criterion, and the near-constant column weight
design (Definition 2.3). If the rate exceeds RNCC defined in(4.1), then the
error probability averaged over the testing matrix is bounded away from zero,
regardless of the decoding algorithm.
This result readily establishes that the achievable rate for the DD algorithm,
stated in Theorem 2.8, is optimal (with respect to the random test design) when
α≥1/2. Recall that these rates are plotted in Figure 4.1.
4.5 General converse and polynomial-time strate-
gies
Having established the exact rates attained by the Bernoulli and near-constant
column weight design, we now turn to the question of whether the latter design’s
90CHAPTER 4. INFORMATION-THEORETIC LIMITS
rate can be improved further, and whether the optimal rate can be attained in a
computationally efficient manner (i.e., polynomial time) for allα∈(0,1) (recall
that the DD algorithm suffices forα≥ 1
2). As stated in Theorem 4.3 and 4.4,
the near-constant column weight design’s rate RNCC = min

1,(ln 2) 1−α
α
	
is in
fact optimal amongall designs, and it can be attained with a computationally
efficient method when a modified test design based on spatial coupling is used.
These results are due to Coja-Oghlanet al.[76], and we proceed to outline their
techniques for the converse and achievability parts separately.
4.5.1 General converse
Here we outline the proof Theorem 4.3, which states that no nonadaptive strat-
egy can improve on the rate RNCC stated in (4.2). The converse of 1 is al-
ready known from the counting bound, so it remains to establish a converse of
(ln 2)1−α
α .
Our presentation combines aspects of Coja-Oghlanet al.[76] and Bay, Price,
and Scarlett [31]; the latter built on the former but considered general sparsity
regimes rather than onlyk= Θ(n α). Like with the analysis of SSS in Section
2.2, the idea is to identifymasked items; that is, items that only appear in tests
with one or more other defectives. The details here are quite different due to
the need to consider arbitrary test designs.
We first highlight a number of useful reductions or simplifications that will
make the analysis easier.
•It turns out that once the result is established with a sparsity parameter
αarbitrarily close to 1, it readily implies the same for all smaller values
ofα. The reasoning behind this is that the rate (ln 2) 1−α
α corresponds
to havingT= 1+o(1)
ln 2 klog 2ktests, which does not directly depend onn.
Then, supposing that this rate is achievable for some smallerα=α small,
we can consider an algorithm that handles some largerα=α large by
first adding ‘dummy’ nondefective items (specifically, enough to induce an
overall sparsity level ofα small). This means that achievability for smaller
αimplies achievability for largerα; the contrapositive statement is then
that a converse for higherαimplies a converse for smallerα.
•It is more convenient to establish the converse for the i.i.d. prior with
q=k/n, rather than the combinatorial prior. The former can then be
translated to the latter by considering a slightly reduced value ofqand
then adding some extra defectives to make the total exactlyk. (If masking
occurs before these additions, it still occurs after them.)
•It is useful to impose upper bounds on the number of tests-per-item and
items-per-test. We can assume there are at most n
k lnnitems per test
without loss of generality, since all tests with more items could be ‘guessed’
as being positive without even performing them, and the guesses would
all be correct with probability approaching one. Once this items-per-test
bound is imposed, a simple degree counting argument further shows that
almost all of the items – namely,n(1−o(1)) of them – appear in at most
(lnn) 3 tests. To simplify the exposition, we will assume that this holds
for allnitems; the general case only requires minor modifications.
4.5. GENERAL CONVERSE AND POLYNOMIAL-TIME STRATEGIES91
•We also assume that every test contains at least two items. This is justified
by the fact that tests containing no items are useless, while tests containing
one item simply reveal that item’s defectivity status. Since we are in
the regimeT=o(n), only an asymptotically negligible fraction of items’
statuses can be learned in this way.
With these reductions in place, we proceed to study the i.i.d. prior,αarbitrarily
close to one, at most n
k lnnitems per test, at most ln 3ntests per item, and at
least two items per test.
Fori= 1,...,n, letD i be the event that itemiis masked (also referred
to asdisguised, hence the use of the symbolD). Under the i.i.d. prior, it is
straightforward to show that the probability ofibeing defective givenD i is
equal to the prior defectivity probabilityq. A single item being masked does
not immediately imply failure: we haveq=o(1), so guessing that item to be
nondefective would be the correct decision with high probability. However if
we can establish thatmanyitems are masked, then guessing they willallbe
nondefective will be likely to fail.
The key result for identifying masked items is due to Aldridge [12] (see also
Section 5.5.1). Under the i.i.d.(q) prior, if every test contains at least two items,
then
P(Di)≥
Y
t:xti=1
 
1−(1−q) wt−1
,
wherew t is the number of items in testt; this can be proved using the FKG
inequality. Taking logarithms and rearranging, we get
1
n
nX
i=1
lnP(Di)≥ T
nL(q),
where
L(q) = min
w=2,3,...,n
wln
 
1−(1−q) w−1
.
The value ofwattaining the minimum inL(q) is roughly (ln 2)/q, which
gives
−L(q)∼ (ln 2)2
q = (ln 2)2 n
k.
Thus,
1
n
nX
i=1
lnP(Di)≳− T
n
(ln 2)2
q .(4.23)
Since the maximum is at least as high as the average, this shows that there
exists a specific itemi 0 such that
P(Di0)≳exp

−T
n
(ln 2)2
q

.(4.24)
One can then use similar ideas to establish the existence ofmanyitems whose
masking probabilityP(D i) satisfies a similar lower bound. When doing so, it is
convenient to choose the variousivalues such that theDi events are independent
of one another. To do so, we note that if the placements of items into tests
are represented by a bipartite graph (see, for example, Figure 3.1), then a
92CHAPTER 4. INFORMATION-THEORETIC LIMITS
masking event for a given itemionly depends on the defectivity status of items
at distance 2 in the graph; that is, items sharing a test withi. Thus, items
separated by distance exceeding 4 have independent masking events. Note that
itemsi,i ′ having a distance exceeding 4 means that (i)iandi ′ do not share
any test, and (ii) the set of items sharing a test withiis disjoint from the set
of items sharing a test withi ′.
In view of this independence observation, we can perform an iterative pro-
cedure as follows:
•Identify somei 0 whose masking probability is at least the bound from
(4.24), as described above.
•Remove all items and tests within distance 4 ofi 0 in the bipartite graph,
and further remove all tests of degree at most 1 and their associated items.
•Proceed back to the first step on the reduced graph and continue this
procedure until some stopping criterion is met.
Note that if an item is masked in the reduced graph, it is also masked in the
original graph. While modifying the graph can slightly changenandT, it
turns out that, thanks to the reduction bounding the number of tests-per-item
and items-per-test, their changes can be made negligible while still extracting
enough items; namely, the ratioT/ncan be kept within a 1 +ηfactor of its
original value for arbitrarily smallη >0. This implies, via (4.24), that all of
the extracted items satisfy
P(Di)≳exp

−(1 +η) T
n
(ln 2)2
q

.
The number of extracted items comes out to be ‘nearly linear’ – say, at least
n1−η – and we know that the associated masking events are independent of one
another. Thus, the average number of masking events is roughly lower bounded
by
n1−η exp

−(1 +η) T
n
(ln 2)2
q

.(4.25)
Due to the independence property, we can readily establish concentration around
this average. Moreover, if this number is significantly higher thann/k, then
with high probability there are both defectives and nondefectives among these
masked items, implying that reliable recovery is impossible.
Since we reduced toαarbitrarily close to 1, we may further assume that
n/k≤n η. Putting this all together with (4.25), substitutingq=k/n, and
solving forT, we find that failure indeed occurs whenTis slightly below
1
(ln 2)2 klnk= 1
ln 2klog 2k,
which corresponds to a rate of (ln 2) 1−α
α and establishes the desired converse.
See [76] (or alternatively [31]) for the full details.
4.5.2 Achievability via spatial coupling
Here we outline the test design and decoding algorithm used for proving The-
orem 4.4; that is, a computationally efficient strategy that achieves the rate
RNCC stated in (4.2) for allα∈(0,1).
4.5. GENERAL CONVERSE AND POLYNOMIAL-TIME STRATEGIES93
Items
T ests
…
…
<latexit sha1_base64="7IuynL2lNAK2gyycgKsUrkkzfSM=">AAACCnicbVDLTgIxFO3gC8cX6tJNFUxwgzMs0CXRjUtM5JEAIZ1ygYa2M2k7JoSwduOvuHGhMW79Anf+jR2YhaInaXJyzj1t7wkizrTxvC8ns7K6tr6R3XS3tnd293L7Bw0dxopCnYY8VK2AaOBMQt0ww6EVKSAi4NAMxteJ37wHpVko78wkgq4gQ8kGjBJjpV7uuFiQ5x3gvICZAaFxBMp1aSgioowAac56ubxX8ubAf4mfkjxKUevlPjv9kMZJmHKiddv3ItOd2vsY5TBzO7GGiNAxGULbUkkE6O50vsoMn1qljwehskcaPFd/JqZEaD0RgZ0UxIz0speI/3nt2Awuu1Mmo9iApIuHBjHHJsRJL7jPFFDDJ5YQqpj9K6Yjogg1tj3XluAvr/yXNMolv1Kq3Jbz1au0jiw6QieoiHx0garoBtVQHVH0gJ7QC3p1Hp1n5815X4xmnDRziH7B+fgG9VCZNA==</latexit>
(n/`items per
compartment)
<latexit sha1_base64="sDi50LW3fo9fHpXzQpPgKYKBJhA=">AAACCnicbVC7TgJBFJ3FF66vVUubUTDBBncp0JJoY4kJrwQImR0uMGH2kZm7JoRQ2/grNhYaY+sX2Pk3Do9CwZNMcnLOPTNzjx9LodF1v63U2vrG5lZ6297Z3ds/cA6PajpKFIcqj2SkGj7TIEUIVRQooRErYIEvoe4Pb6d+/QGUFlFYwVEM7YD1Q9ETnKGROs5pLlu5bIGUWYqgUdMYlG3zKIiZwgBCvOg4GTfvzkBXibcgGbJAueN8tboRT6ZhLpnWTc+NsT029wkuYWK3Eg0x40PWh6ahIQtAt8ezVSb03Chd2ouUOSHSmfo7MWaB1qPAN5MBw4Fe9qbif14zwd51eyzCOEEI+fyhXiIpRnTaC+0KBRzlyBDGlTB/pXzAFONo2rNNCd7yyqukVsh7xXzxvpAp3SzqSJMTckZyxCNXpETuSJlUCSeP5Jm8kjfryXqx3q2P+WjKWmSOyR9Ynz/l9Jkr</latexit>
(T/`tests per
compartment)
Figure 4.2: Illustration of the spatially coupled test design. Each arrow corre-
sponds to performing a certain number of random placements of items (from
the item compartment) into tests (from the test compartment). For the final
item compartments (not shown), these arrows would wrap around to the first
test compartments.
Spatially coupled test designThe test design groups items and tests into
equal-size compartments that can be decoded one at a time, with the infor-
mation learned about each compartment being propagated to a small number
of subsequent compartments. The number of compartments isℓ=
√
lnn, and
we view them as being arranged in a circular structure so that the ‘subsequent
compartment’ after theℓth one is the first one. See Figure 4.2 for an illustration.
Within therth compartment of items, each item joins a random number
of tests not only in therth compartment of tests, but also in the subsequent
s−1 compartments, withs= ln lnn. In order to ‘kick start’ the recovery
procedure, the firstscompartments of items are given some additional tests,
namely, sufficiently many for DD decoding to succeed on them.
Decoding strategyThe decoding algorithm, termedspatial inference vertex
cover(SPIV), operates in several phases:
•In Phase 1, the firstscompartments of items are decoded using the DD
algorithm, as hinted above.
•In Phase 2, the subsequent compartments of items are decoded iteratively
using information from previous compartments. Within each decoding
subroutine, any item in a negative test is first marked as nondefective.
After doing so, the remaining items are categorized by looking for tests
containing that item but not containing items previously declared as de-
fective; see below for further details.
•In Phase 3, a ‘clean-up’ procedure is performed to correct for a possible
small number of mistakes from Phase 2; see below for further details.
We first provide the additional details on Phase 2. Suppose that itemilies in
compartmentr+ 1, meaning it is involved in tests in compartments{r+j} s
j=1.
For eachj, letW i,j be the number of positive tests in compartmentr+jthat
contain itemibut none of the items that were previously declared defective
(in the compartments up tor). Then, an natural strategy would be to decide
defectivity by thresholding Ps
j=1Wi,j, which is indeed higher on average when
iis defective. However, the degree of concentration around the average turns
out to be insufficient for such an approach to be asymptotically optimal. To
94CHAPTER 4. INFORMATION-THEORETIC LIMITS
get the required improvement, the idea is to consider aweighted combination
of the form Ps
j=1wjWi,j for suitably-chosen{w j}s
j=1. The idea is that the
counts ofW i,j are more informative for smaller values ofj, since the earlier
compartments are able to receive information from a larger number of ‘already
decoded’ compartments. The precise choice of{w j}s
j=1 is omitted here, but it
turns out to be sufficient for correctly classifyingn−o(k) out of thenitems.
The purpose of Phase 3 is to correct for theo(k) mistakes. To do this,
for each item currently believed to be defective (except those in the firsts
compartments), we count the number of positive tests in which it is the only item
estimated as being defective. It can be shown that if the item is truly defective,
this number should be Θ(logn), whereas for nondefectives it is much lower.
Accordingly, the item’s defectivity status is updated by thresholding the count
at (lnn) 1/4. Using expansion properties of the bipartite graph representing the
test design, it is shown that the number of misclassifications reduces by a factor
of at least 3 each time this step is performed, meaning it can be iteratedO(logn)
times to correct all mistakes.
We again refer the reader to [76] for the full details of this outline. To our
knowledge, no attempt has been made to implement the test design and decod-
ing strategy experimentally (or a modified version of it); accordingly, it may be
of interest in future work to establish whether the theoretical asymptotic opti-
mality guarantee can indeed translate to being beneficial at practical problem
sizes.
4.6 Noisy settings
We now turn our attention to noisy settings, considering general noise models
of the form (4.3) – that is, those that satisfy the only defects matter property
of Definition 3.2. As we discussed previously, our initial achievability analysis
leading to the non-asymptotic bound (4.15) is valid for any such model, and
hence, a reasonable approach is to follow the subsequent steps of the noiseless
model. The main difficulty in doing so is establishing suitable concentration
inequalities analogous to Lemma 4.2.
We proceed by presenting a general achievability result for the very sparse
regimek=O(1), where establishing the desired concentration is straightfor-
ward. We also give a matching converse bound that remains valid for the sparse
regimek= Θ(n α). Achievability bounds and refined converse bounds in the
sparse regime are more difficult, and are postponed to Section 4.6.2.
4.6.1 General noise models in the very sparse regime
The following theorem provides a general characterization of the required num-
ber of tests in terms of suitable conditional mutual information quantities. This
result was given in the works of Malyutov [212] and Atia and Saligrama [24];
see also [99] for a survey paying finer attention to the error exponent (that is,
the exponential rate of decay of the error probability) and considering universal
decoding rules (where the noise distribution is not known).
Theorem 4.7.Consider any noiseless group testing setup of the form(4.3),
withBernoulli(p)testing andk= Θ(n α)withα∈[0,1). Then in order to
4.6. NOISY SETTINGS95
achieve vanishing error probability asn→∞, it is necessary that
T≥max
τ=1,...,k
τlog 2
n
τ
I(X0,τ;Y|X 1,τ)(1−o(1)),(4.26)
where the mutual information is with respect to the independent random vectors
(X0,τ,X 1,τ)of sizes(τ,k−τ)containing independentBernoulli(p)entries, along
with the noise modelP Y|V in(4.3). Moreover, in the case thatα= 0(k=O(1))
a matching achievability bound holds, and the maximum achievable rate is given
by
R
noisy
Bern = min
τ=1,...,k
1
τI(X0,τ;Y|X 1,τ) (4.27)
=I(X 0,k;Y).(4.28)
Observe that the equality (4.28) states that the minimum in (4.27) is achieved
byτ=k, and the capacity reduces to a single unconditional mutual information
term. Moreover, if the noisy defective channel property holds (Definition 3.3)
and the Bernoulli testing parameter is optimized, this mutual information term
reduces to the corresponding channel capacity – for example,I(U;Y) = 1−h(ρ)
for the symmetric noise model.
However, the capacity equalling (4.28) crucially relies on two assumptions:
(i) the observation model (4.3) is symmetric, in the sense of depending only on
the number of defectives in the test, and not the specific defectives included;
and (ii) the number of defectives is bounded, i.e.,k=O(1). Counterexamples
to (4.28) in cases that the former condition fails can be found in [212]. As for
the latter condition, we observe that the term log 2
n
τ can range from log 2
n
k to
log2n, and these two terms can have a non-negligible difference whenkscales
withn. For instance, one can infer from the analysis of [241] that the term
corresponding toτ= 1 can dominate in the regimek= Θ(n α) whenα∈(0,1)
is sufficiently close to one.
The assumptionk=O(1) in the achievability part is highly restrictive; we
discuss this point further in Section 4.6.2. Another limitation of Theorem 4.7 is
that the converse part is specific to Bernoulli testing; however, analogous results
for arbitrary nonadaptive test designs have also been established in [213, 240],
the details of which are omitted here.
Discussion of achievability proof
Proofs of the achievability part of Theorem 4.7 can be found in [214, 24, 241];
continuing the earlier analysis, we discuss the approach of [241].
As mentioned above, the bound (4.15) remains valid in the noisy setting,
and the main step in the subsequent analysis is establishing the concentration
ofı T (X0,τ;Y|X 1,τ). In general, this is a challenging task, and may introduce
extra conditions onT, as we saw in the proof of Theorem 4.1. However, it
turns out that whenk=O(1), the concentration bound given in the second
part of Lemma 4.2 (which extends immediately to general noise models [243])
is sufficient. Indeed, assuming boundedkgreatly simplifies matters, since it
means that the combinatorial term
 k
τ

in (4.15) is also bounded.
The equality (4.28) follows from elementary information-theoretic arguments,
which we outline here. Assuming without loss of generality thatK={1,...,k},
96CHAPTER 4. INFORMATION-THEORETIC LIMITS
writing the entries ofX K as (X1,...,X k) accordingly, and lettingX j′
j denote
the collection (Xj,...,X j′) for indices 1≤j≤j ′≤k, we have
1
τI(X0,τ;Y|X 1,τ) = 1
τI(Xk
k−τ+1 ;Y|X k−τ
1 ) (4.29)
= 1
τ
kX
j=k−τ+1
I(Xj;Y|X j−1
1 ) (4.30)
= 1
τ
kX
j=k−τ+1
 
H(Xj)−H(X j|Y,X j−1
1 )

,(4.31)
where (4.29) follows from the definition of (X0,τ,X 1,τ) and the symmetry of the
noise model in (4.3), (4.30) follows from the chain rule for mutual information,
and (4.31) follows sinceX j is independent ofX j−1
1 . We establish the desired
claim by observing that (4.31) is decreasing inτ: The termH(X j) is the same
for allj, whereas the termH(X j|Y,Xj−1
1 ) is smaller for higher values ofj
because conditioning reduces entropy.
Discussion of converse proof
In light of the apparent connection between channel coding and group testing
(see Figure 1.1), a natural starting point is to apply Fano’s inequality, which
states that in order to achieve an error probability ofδ, it is necessary that
I(K;Y|X)≥log 2
n
k

(1−δ)−1.(4.32)
Note thatYdepends onKonly throughX K, which corresponds toX 0,k in the
above notation. We can therefore replaceI(K;Y|X) byI(X 0,k;Y), which
in turn equalsTI(X 0,k;Y) since the tests are independent. Substituting into
(4.32) and rearranging, we obtain the necessary condition
T≥ log2
 n
k

I(X0,k;Y)

1−δ− 1
log2
 n
k


.(4.33)
This bound matches (4.26) whenever the maximum therein is achieved byτ=k.
However, as discussed above, this is not always the case.
The key to overcoming this limitation is to use a ‘genie argument’ [24], in
which a subset ofKis revealed to the decoder, and it only remains to estimate
the non-revealed part. This clearly only makes the recovery problem easier, so
any converse for this genie-aided setting remains valid in the original setting.
Note that sinceXis generated in a symmetric i.i.d. manner and the assumed
model (4.3) is invariant to relabelling, it makes no difference precisely which
indices are revealed; all that matters is the number revealed. (However, the
revealed indices must not depend onXory.) Lettingτdenote the number of
defectives left to estimate, the number revealed is equal tok−τ.
In the genie-aided setting, the number of possible defective sets reduces from n
k

to
 n−k+τ
τ

. Moreover, the relevant mutual information in Fano’s inequality
is notI(K;Y|X), but insteadI(K 0,τ;Y|K 1,τ,X), whereK 0,τ (respectively,K 1,τ)
denotes the non-revealed (respectively, revealed) defective item indices. Upon
4.6. NOISY SETTINGS97
upper bounding the mutual information via the data processing inequality, we
obtain the following analogue of (4.33):
T≥ log2
 n−k+τ
τ

I(X0,τ;Y|X 1,τ)

1−δ− 1
log2
 n−k+τ
τ


.(4.34)
We then recover (4.26) by maximizing overτ= 1,...,kand noting that
log2
n−k+τ
τ

=

τlog 2
n
τ

(1 +o(1)).(4.35)
We mention that an alternative approach was taken in [241], bearing a
stronger resemblance to the above achievability proof and again relying on
change-of-measure techniques from the channel coding literature. The proof
of [241] has the advantage of recovering the so-called ‘strong converse’ (see Re-
mark 1.3), but it requires additional effort in ensuring that the suitable sums of
information densities concentrate around the corresponding conditional mutual
information.
Examples: Symmetric, addition, and dilution noise
We briefly discuss the application of Theorem 4.7 to one symmetric noise model
and two asymmetric noise models introduced above:
•Recall from Example 3.1 that in the binary symmetric noise model, each
test outcome gets flipped with some probabilityρ. By bounding the mu-
tual information in Theorem 4.7, we find that the optimal number of tests
withk=O(1) behaves as
1 +o(1)
1−h(ρ) klog 2n,
whereh(ρ) is the binary entropy function in bits (see, for example, [214,
241, 24]). This is natural, since 1−h(ρ) is the capacity of the binary
symmetric channel. We note that that 1−h(ρ) = Θ((1−2ρ) 2) has a
quadratic dependence inρforρ≈ 1
2.
•Recall from Example 3.2 that theaddition noisemodel takes the form
Yt =
 W
i∈K Xti

∨Zt, whereZ t∼Bernoulli(φ). By bounding the mutual
information in Theorem 4.7, it was shown in [24] that the optimal number
of tests withk=O(1) behaves asO
 klogn
1−φ

. Hence, we have a simple
linear dependence on the addition noise parameter.
•Recall from Example 3.3 that thedilution noisemodel takes the form
Yt =W
i∈K
 
Xti∧Zti

, whereZ ti∼Bernoulli(ϑ). By bounding the mutual
information in Theorem 4.7, it was shown in [24] that the optimal number
of testsk=O(1) behaves asO
 klogn
(1−ϑ)2

. Hence, the dependence in the
denominator is quadratic.
Additional expressions for the relevant mutual information terms for various
noise models, often including precise constant factors, can be found in [185].
98CHAPTER 4. INFORMATION-THEORETIC LIMITS
4.6.2 Binary channel noise models in general sparse regimes
In Section 4.2, we outlined the techniques of Scarlett and Cevher [243] for estab-
lishing the achievability threshold for Bernoulli testing in the noiseless setting.
These techniques also naturally apply to noisy settings, and, accordingly, they
were applied to the symmetric noise model in [243] to obtain an achievable rate
that notably equals 1−h(ρ) (withh(ρ) being the binary entropy function) when
αis sufficiently small in the scalingk= Θ(n α). However, for largerαvalues,
significant gaps still remained following their work, and the understanding of
the noisy setting had generally lagged behind the noiseless setting.
In recent concurrent works by Chen and Scarlett [58] and Coja-Oghlanet
al.[78], these gaps have been substantially reduced. The main results of these
papers are highly technical even to state (let alone prove), so we only provide
an outline conveying the main ideas and findings.
We first highlight the differences in the results in these two works:
•Chen and Scarlett [58] focus on the binary symmetric noise model (see
Example 3.1), in which each test outcome is flipped with probability
ρ∈(0, 1
2). Under this model, they attain exact information-theoretic
thresholds for both the Bernoulli design and the near-constant column
weight design, with the former design establishing that the achievable
rates in [243] are suboptimal (except for smallα), and the latter design
providing further improvements.
•Coja-Oghlanet al.[78] consider arbitrary binary channel noise models
(see Example 3.5) that need not be symmetric, and show that a design
based on spatial coupling attains a threshold matching that of [58] when
specialized to symmetric noise, while having polynomial-time decoding.
They also show that the same threshold serves as a converse for the near-
constant column weight design.
To simplify the exposition, we will focus only on symmetric noise below.
Collectively, the results outlined above establish the exact rates achieved by
the Bernoulli design and the near-constant column weight design, and show
that the latter can be achieved with polynomial-time decoding using spatial
coupling. Thus, they bring the understanding to a level that nearly matches
the noiseless setting, except that it remains unknown whether the near-constant
column weight design is optimal amongallnonadaptive designs.
The following theorem reveals the general form of the thresholds attained in
these works, as well as the weaker threshold in [243].
Theorem 4.8.Consider the symmetric noise model with parameterρin the
sparse regimek= Θ(n α),α∈(0,1). With the Bernoulli design or the near-
constant column weight design with an optimized parameterν, there exists a
decoder achieving the rate
RBern
sym = min

1−h(ρ), c(ρ,α)
	
,(4.36)
whereh(ρ)is the binary entropy function in bits, andc(ρ,α)is a continuous
function withc(ρ,0)>1−h(ρ). In particular, for sufficiently smallα, the
capacity is given by
Csym = 1−h(ρ).(4.37)
4.6. NOISY SETTINGS99
0 0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8 1
Sparsity Parameter 
0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1
Rate (bits/test)
Near-Constant (Exact)
Bernoulli (Exact)
Near-Constant (NDD)
Bernoulli (NDD)
0 0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8 1
Sparsity Parameter 
0
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
0.6Rate (bits/test)
Near-Constant (Exact)
Bernoulli (Exact)
Near-Constant (NDD)
Bernoulli (NDD)
Figure 4.3: Rates of noisy group test withρ= 0.01 (left) andρ= 0.11 (right).
The curves labelled NDD represent the achievable rates of the near-definite
defectives algorithm (Section 3.6).
While the result of [243] for Bernoulli testing was in this form, it was given
with a highly suboptimal expression forc(ρ,α), whereas [58, 78] established
precise expressions for the respective designs. These precise expressions for
c(ρ,α) are complicated, so are omitted here, but the resulting rate plots for
ρ= 0.01 andρ= 0.11 are shown in Figure 4.3.
A consequence of these results is that existing approaches such as noisy
DD (see Section 3.6) are strictly suboptimal under symmetric noise. This is in
contrast with certain asymmetric models, where noisy DD can be optimal forα
close to 1. Another curious finding in these works is that for the near-constant
column weight design, the optimal test design parameterνis not always ln 2;
rather, it is ln 2 for smallα, then quickly jumps to a higher value, and then
steadily decreases again.
We give a very brief outline of the proof techniques in [58, 78] as follows,
mainly focusing on the differences to the noiseless setting:
•To establish converse results, the dominant error event is no longercom-
plete masking(see Sections 2.2 and 4.5.1), but instead the following: (i) a
defectivei∈Khas relatively few tests in which it is the only defective,
and not too few of those tests are flipped by the noise; (ii) a nondefective
j /∈Kappears in sufficiently many tests without any defectives, and not
too few of those tests are flipped by the noise. Under suitably-defined
events of this type, we can deduce thatK∪{j}\{i}is favoured overK
by the optimal maximum-likelihood decoder, thus leading to an error.
•In [58], it is discussed that, perhaps surprisingly, extending the techniques
of [243] leads to a suboptimal rate for Bernoulli testing. The looseness
stems from the set difference parameterτ(see (4.26)) sometimes being
dominant atτ= 1 rather thanτ=k, particularly asαincreases. (Another
source of weakness in [243] is using a suboptimal concentration bound for
the information density whenτis small, but the limitation being discussed
here applies even when an optimal concentration bound is used.) To cir-
cumvent this weakness, ahybriddecoder is proposed in [58] that reduces
the analysis to information-theoretic thresholding (as in Section 4.2) for
incorrect sets ‘far’ from the true one, but to maximum-likelihood decod-
100CHAPTER 4. INFORMATION-THEORETIC LIMITS
ing for those ‘close’ to the true one. The maximum-likelihood decoding
analysis then follows similar ideas to the converse analysis.
•In [58] the spatial coupling approach is taken. The general ideas are similar
to those outlined in Section 4.5.2 but with non-minor technical differences,
whose details we omit here.
We conclude this section by reiterating that neither [58] nor [78] attempted
to establish a matching converse bound forarbitrarynonadaptive test designs,
and this remains an important gap in this line of works.
Chapter 5
Other Topics in Group
Testing
In this chapter, we explore extensions of group testing beyond the settings con-
sidered in the previous chapters, which were primarily focused on nonadaptive
randomized designs, the exact recovery criterion, and sublinear scaling in the
number of defectives. Many of the extensions considered below have natural
analogues in classical information theory, and we attempt to draw such paral-
lels when they arise naturally.
5.1 Approximate recovery
In many group testing situations, one might be satisfied with an estimate of
the defective set ˆKbeing ‘sufficiently close’ to the true defective setK, without
demanding the exact recovery criterion we have considered throughout this sur-
vey. That is, it might suffice for the number offalse negative items|K\ ˆK|and
the number offalse positive items| ˆK\K|to be small, without them necessarily
being zero. For example, when screening for diseases, a small number of false
positives might lead to slightly more medical attention for those who did not
need it, a cost which might be small compared to performing many more pooled
tests.
We briefly mention that moving to approximate recovery is known to signif-
icantly help under the zero-error recovery criterion, allowing one to break the
Ω(k2) barrier discussed in Section 1.6 and instead use onlyO(klogn) tests, even
in the presence of adversarial test errors [62]. In the following, we focus only on
the small-error criterion.
5.1.1 Achievable rates
Permitting a limited number of mistakes in the reconstruction is analogous to the
notion ofrate–distortion theoryin information theory, where one only requires
a source to be reconstructed approximately (see [83, Chapter 10] for a review of
this topic). A natural performance criterion that treats both error types equally
is
Pd(err) =P
 
|K\ ˆK|>dor| ˆK\K|>d

,
101
102CHAPTER 5. OTHER TOPICS IN GROUP TESTING
which declares an error if either the number of false negatives or false positives
exceeds a common thresholdd.
The following result, due to Scarlett and Cevher [241], characterizes how
this relaxed criterion affects the required number of tests when this threshold is
a constant fraction of the number of defectives.
Theorem 5.1.For nonadaptive group testing withk=o(n)andd=γkfor
someγ∈(0,1), under the Bernoulli test design with parameterp, we have the
following:
•Withp= ln 2
k , there exists an algorithm such thatP d(err)→0provided
thatT >(1 +η)T ∗ for arbitrarily smallη >0, where
T∗ =klog 2
n
k.
•For anypand any algorithm, in order to achieveP d(err)→0it is neces-
sary thatT >(1−η)T ∗
γ for arbitrarily smallη >0, where
T∗
γ = (1−γ)klog 2
n
k = (1−γ)T ∗.
The achievability part can be proved using the argument used to prove The-
orem 4.1 (see Section 4.2). The difference is that we only need to consider
incorrect sets having small overlap with the true defective set, since those with
large overlap still suffice for approximate recovery. The converse part is also
proved in a similar manner to the exact recovery result.
Theorem 5.1 implies both positive and negative results on the extent to
which approximate recovery reduces the number of tests under the Bernoulli
design compared with the bounds discussed in Chapter 4. Lettingαbe the
exponent such thatk= Θ(n α) as usual, we observe the following:
•Forα≤1/3, the gain is very limited, amounting to at most a reduction by
the multiplicative factor 1−γ, which vanishes asγ→0. This is because
nonadaptive Bernoulli testing achieves a rate of 1 in this regime.
•Forα >1/3, the gain is more significant – the number of tests remains 
klog 2
n
k

(1 +o(1)) under the approximate recovery criterion, whereas for
exact recovery the rate tends to zero asα→1.
Extensions of Theorem 5.1 are given in [242] to alist decodingsetting, in which
the decoder outputs a list of lengthL≥kand it is only required that the list
contains at least (1−γ)kdefectives. (The concept of list decoding for group
testing also appeared much earlier under the zero-error criterion, e.g., see [166]).
IfLis much larger thank, this means that we are potentially allowing a large
number of false positives. However, a finding of [242] is that this relaxation only
amounts to a replacement ofklog 2
n
k byklog 2
n
L in the required number of tests
(asymptotically), which is a rather minimal gain.
We additionally note some follow-up works giving further related results:
•A counterpart to Theorem 5.1 for the near-constant tests-per-item design
can be inferred from [75], though they focused on exact recovery (as we
surveyed in Section 4.4).
5.1. APPROXIMATE RECOVERY103
•The achievability part can also be proved for a spatially coupled test design
that permits polynomial time decoding [76, Sec. 5] (as we surveyed for
exact recovery in Section 4.5.2).
•The necessary conditionT≥(1−γ)klog 2
n
k (and its proof) applies to
general nonadaptive designs, and there is a simple nonadaptive design
that gives a matching achievability result [273].
To establish the last claim, the idea is to ignore aγ−η ′ fraction of the items
for some smallη ′ >0, i.e., do not test them, and simply guess that they are
nondefective. Among the remaining (1−γ+η ′)nitems, there are roughly
(1−γ+η ′)kdefectives, and we test these items using a Bernoulli design in a
similar manner to Theorem 5.1, but with suitably modified parameters to ensure
fewer thanη ′kfalse positives and false negatives (rather thanγk). Since the
step of ignoring items incurs roughly (γ−η ′)kfalse negatives, we can ensure
at mostγkfalse negatives overall (and at mostη ′k < γkfalse positives), as
desired. Takingη ′→0 then gives the desired result with a 1−γfactor saving
in the number of tests. The full details can be found in [273].
It is also of interest to understand the achievable rates of the practical al-
gorithms studied in Chapter 2 and 3 under the approximate recovery criterion.
In the noiseless case, it is in fact straightforward to extend the exact recovery
analysis of COMP and DD; starting with the Bernoulli design, we note the
following:
•The COMP algorithm (Algorithm 2.2) always has no false negatives, and
the analysis of Section 2.3 shows that whenT≥(eklnn)(1 +η) so (i.e.,
the rate is below (1−α)/(e ln 2)), the average number of false positives
tends to zero, and therefore the probability of having one or more false
positives also tends to zero. By a nearly identical analysis, one finds that
whenT≥
 
ekln n
k

(1+η), the average number of false positives behaves as
o(k), and therefore the probability of having more thanγkfalse positives
tends to zero for any fixedγ∈(0,1), by Markov’s inequality.
•The DD algorithm (Algorithm 2.3) always has no false positives, and the
analysis of Section 2.4 shows that whenT≥
 
ekln n
k

(1 +η), any given
defective item is the unique ‘possible defective’ (PD) in some test, with
probability approaching one. For exact recovery, an additional condition
T≥(eklnk)(1 +η) arises from a union bound over thekdefective items.
In the case of approximate recovery, however, we can instead use the fact
that the average number of defective items failing to be the unique PD in
some test behaves aso(k), and therefore, the probability of having more
thanγkfalse negatives tends to zero for any fixedγ∈(0,1), by Markov’s
inequality.
Hence, using Definition 1.7 and (1.11), a rate ofR= 1
e ln 2≈0.531 is achieved by
COMP with no false negatives, and by DD with no false positives. For the near-
constant column weight design one can follow similar ideas and attain analogous
results with the rates improved to ln 2≈0.693. The details can be found
in the recent work of McMorrow and Scarlett [217], who further established
the information-theoretically optimal rates under both one-sided approximate
recovery criteria (false positives only and false negatives only).
104CHAPTER 5. OTHER TOPICS IN GROUP TESTING
Rate Rate No false + No false−
(Bern.) (near-const.)
Optimal1 1 no no
COMP 1
e ln 2 ln 2 no yes
DD 1
e ln 2 ln 2 yes no
Separate Dec.ln 2 – no no
Table 5.1: Summary of achievable rates (in bits/test) for approximate recovery
under Bernoulli testing. Each achievable rate holds for allα∈(0,1) and an
arbitrarily small (but constant) fraction of mistakes in the reconstruction. The
final two columns indicate whether the algorithm is guaranteed to have no false
positives/negatives.
In fact, the rate ln 2 for approximate recovery can also be obtained under
the Bernoulli design. Specifically, using similar arguments based on avoiding
the union bound and instead applying Markov’s inequality, it has been shown
that separate decoding of items (see Section 3.5) achieves a rate of ln 2≈0.693
in the noiseless setting when bothγkfalse positives andγkfalse negatives are
allowed [245]. This rate is higher than that of COMP and DD for the Bernoulli
design, but comes with the caveat of requiring both false positives and false
negatives. The results are summarized in Table 5.1.
Analogous results have also been given in noisy settings. For instance, un-
der the symmetric noise model with parameterρ∈(0,1/2), the information-
theoretic rate given in Theorem 5.1 naturally becomes 1−h(ρ), and the rate
based on separate decoding of items becomes (1−h(ρ)) ln 2. The interested
reader is referred to [245, 241].
5.1.2 All-or-nothing thresholds
As discussed following Theorem 5.1, theklog 2
n
k threshold for Bernoulli design
can be improved to (1−γ)klog 2
n
k when the approximate recovery parameter
isd=γk, by moving to a slightly modified design that ignores some items and
declares them as nondefective. This raises the question of whether modifying
the design is actually necessary to break theklog 2
n
k barrier while still attaining
the approximate recovery guarantee for someγ∈(0,1).
A result of Niles-Weed and Zadik [228], which strengthened earlier results of
Truong, Aldridge, and Scarlett [273], shows that the thresholdT ∗ =klog 2
n
k in
fact serves as a very strong threshold for the Bernoulli design wheneverk=o(n):
If the number of tests is reduced even slightly (by a multiplicative factor 1−ηfor
arbitrarily smallη >0), then not even a small fraction of the defectives will be
recovered correctly. Specifically, we cannot achieve approximate recovery with
d=γkforanyfixedγ∈(0,1); even a large choice such asγ= 0.99.
Combining this result with Theorem 5.1, we see that under the Bernoulli de-
sign, ‘near-perfect’ recovery is possible whenT >(1 +η)T ∗, but ‘near-useless’
recovery is unavoidable whenT <(1−η)T ∗. This phenomenon is known as
anall-or-nothing threshold, and had previously been observed for other statis-
tical estimation problems. An analogous result was subsequently given for the
5.2. ADAPTIVE TESTING WITH LIMITED STAGES105
constant column weight design by Coja-Oghlanet al.[77]. Collectively, these
results establish the following.
Theorem 5.2.Consider the noiseless nonadaptive group testing problem in
the sparse regimek= Θ(n α)withα∈(0,1), and letKbe the true defective
set of sizek. Then, under either the Bernoulli design or the constant column
weight design with the parameterνchosen such that half the tests are positive
on average (up to suitable rounding in the latter design), we have the following:
•(‘All’) If the rate is below1, in thatT≥(1 +η)klog 2
n
k for someη >0,
then there exists a decoding strategy recovering an estimate ˆKsuch that
|K\ ˆK|=o(k)and| ˆK\K|=o(k)with probability approaching one.
•(‘Nothing’) If the rate exceeds1, in thatT≤(1−η)klog 2
n
k for some
η >0, then for any decoding strategy producing an estimate ˆKof sizek,
it holds with probability approaching one that|K∩ ˆK|=o(k).
For the Bernoulli design with parameterp=ν/k, to have half the tests be
positive on average, one should chooseνto satisfy
 
1− ν
k
k
= 1
2, which implies
ν= ln 2 +o(1). Similarly, one can show for the near-constant column weight
design with parameterL=νT/kthat one should also setν= ln 2 +o(1). For
the Bernoulli design, the more general case of (1− ν
k )k equalling a constant in
(0, 1
2) was also handled in [228], though the case that this constant lies in ( 1
2,1)
was skipped for technical reasons.
5.2 Adaptive testing with limited stages
5.2.1 Noiseless testing
We saw in Section 1.5 that adaptive testing permits the exact zero-error identi-
fication ofKwith an information-theoretically optimal rateR= 1. This offers
two key advantages over nonadaptive testing: replacing the small-error crite-
rion by the zero-error criterion, and achievingR= 1, which is only possible
fork=O(n 0.409) in the nonadaptive case. On the other hand, adaptive test-
ing schemes may come with considerable overhead compared to nonadaptive
testing, since it is no longer possible to perform all of the tests in parallel.
An interesting variation that potentially attains the benefits of both worlds
istwo-stage testing, in which a very limited amount of adaptivity is allowed;
namely, one can only perform two stages of testing, in which the tests in the
second stage can depend on the outcomes in the first stage. The binary split-
ting algorithm (Algorithm 1.1) described in Section 1.5 does not fall into this
category, and in fact usesO(logn) stages.
A variety of algorithms and results have been proposed for the two-stage
setting [32, 90, 91, 204, 219]. Here we present a result of M´ ezard and Toninelli
[219], which improves on the earlier bounds of [32]. Note that here the notion
of ‘rate’ is defined with respect to theaveragenumber of tests for a random
defective set (i.e., using
log2 (
n
k)
ET in (1.12) instead of
log2 (
n
k)
T ); we refer to this as
thevariable-Tsetting.
106CHAPTER 5. OTHER TOPICS IN GROUP TESTING
Theorem 5.3.Consider the problem of two-stage group testing in the variable-
Tsetting with zero error. Whenk= Θ(n α)for someα∈(0,1), the following
rate is achievable:
R2 =



1
e ln 2≈0.531α≤ 1
2
ln 2≈0.693α> 1
2.
This result was stated in [219] under the i.i.d. prior defectivity model (see
the Appendix to Chapter 1), but the proof transfers easily to the combinatorial
prior. A converse of ln 2 for allα∈(0,1) is also given in [219] under the
i.i.d. prior (in particular matching the achievability part whenα> 1
2).
The idea behind achieving the zero-error recovery criterion in Theorem 5.3
is to individually test any item whose status is not determined by the first
stage. Once the structure of the second stage is fixed in this way, the freedom
in the test design is entirely in the first stage. Forα>1/2, this stage is based
on the standard i.i.d. Bernoulli testing procedure considered throughout this
monograph, whereas forα≤1/2, an alternative construction is used in which
Xhas both constant row weight and constant column weight. We observe that
two-stage testing with zero error probability requiresconsiderablyfewer tests
compared to the nonadaptive case, in particular avoiding the Ω(k 2) barrier (see
Section 1.6). The benefits of two-stage testing will further be explored for the
linear regimek∼βnin Section 5.5, using similar ideas to those of Theorem 5.3.
At this point, it is natural to question whether there exists a more gen-
eral trade-off between the number of stages and the rate. This question was
addressed by Damaschke and Muhammad [90] under both the small-error and
zero-error recovery criteria. Among other things, it was proved that even in the
zero-error setting, four stages is enough to attain a rate of one.
Theorem 5.4.For anyk=o(n), the capacity of four-stage adaptive group
testing in the variable-Tsetting with zero error isC 4 = 1.
A high-level description of the four-stage algorithm establishing this result
is as follows:
•Thenitems are split into k
∆ ‘cells’ of size ∆n
k , where ∆→0 sufficiently
slowly so that ∆ log n
k→∞.
•In the first stage, each test (one per cell) consists of all the items in a
given cell, and hence, all empty cells are identified as containing only
nondefectives.
•In the second stage, for each non-empty cell, a known nonadaptive pro-
cedure is used to identify whether the cell has exactly one defective item
(and if so, also determine its index) or more than one item.
•In the third and fourth stages, the cells having multiple items are merged,
and a two-stage group testing procedure is applied (e.g., the one corre-
sponding to Theorem 5.3 suffices).
It is natural to question whether an analogous result holds with two or three
stages. The converse result discussed following Theorem 5.3 indicates that the
answer is negative in the case of two stages and the zero-error criterion. On
the other hand, if one considers the small-error criterion in place of zero-error,
5.2. ADAPTIVE TESTING WITH LIMITED STAGES107
Reference Rate # Stages Zero-error?
[219]
(
1
e ln 2 α≤ 1
2
ln 2α> 1
2
2 yes
[90] 1 4 yes
[90] 1 3 no
[239, 76] 1 2 no
Table 5.2: Summary of rates for multi-stage adaptive group testing in the noise-
less setting whenk= Θ(n α), depending on the number of stages and whether
the error probability is zero (in which case the number of tests may be variable
– the ‘variable-T’ setting).
a rate of one can be achieved with two stages, as shown in the following result
of [239] (see also [90] for an earlier result using three stages, and [76] for an
analogous result via spatial coupling with polynomial decoding time).
Theorem 5.5.For anyk= Θ(n α)withα∈(0,1), the capacity of two-stage
adaptive group testing in the fixed-Tsetting under the small-error criterion is
C2 = 1.
The high-level idea of the proof is straightforward:
•By the approximate recovery result of Theorem 5.1, in the first stage, we
can find an estimate ˆK1 of cardinalitykwith at mostγkfalse positives
andγkfalse negatives, whereγ >0 is an arbitrarily small constant.
•In the second stage, we apply any nonadaptive noiseless strategy on the
reduced ground set{1,...,n}\ ˆK1 to resolve the false negatives. As long
as this strategy achieves a positive rate, the required number of tests will
beO(γklogn), which is negligible sinceγis arbitrarily small.
•Simultaneously in the second stage, we test the items in ˆK1 individually
to resolve the false positives. This only requiresktests.
The results for the noiseless setting surveyed throughout this subsection are
summarized in Table 5.2.
5.2.2 Noisy settings
The approach described following Theorem 5.5 was adopted in [239] not only
for the noiseless setting, but also for noisy settings. The changes compared to
the noiseless setting are outlined as follows. In the first step, one can make use
of the approximate recovery results for the noisy setting outlined at the end of
Section 5.1. In the second step, one can use a noisy nonadaptive algorithm that
achieves a positive rate, such as the NCOMP algorithm introduced in Section
3.4. In the third step, testing each item once is no longer sufficient, but testing
each item Θ(log2k) times is enough to combat the noise.
This approach, as well as a slightly refined three-stage version, leads to sig-
nificant improvements over the best known rates for noisy nonadaptive group
108CHAPTER 5. OTHER TOPICS IN GROUP TESTING
0 0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8 1
Sparsity Parameter 
0
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
0.6Rate (bits/test)
Nonadaptive
Adaptive
Converse
Figure 5.1: Adaptive and nonadaptive rates for the symmetric noise model
(Example 3.1) with noise levelρ= 0.11. The adaptive rate is obtained by
settingγ= 1 in [239, Thm. 3], and a very slight improvement can be obtained
by optimizingγtherein (see [269] for further discussion). The nonadaptive rate
shown here is from [58, 78] (as surveyed in Section 4.6.2).
testing, as illustrated in Figure 5.1. Another contribution of [239], also demon-
strated in this figure, was to provide an algorithm-independent converse demon-
strating that the rate must approach zero asα→1 (regardless of the number
of stages of adaptivity), in stark contrast to the noiseless setting in which a rate
of one can be achieved for allα∈(0,1). While the achievability curve in Figure
5.1 does not correspond to a computationally efficient algorithm (since the first
adaptive stage in [239] uses an intractable information-theoretic decoder), the
same rate was subsequently attained using two efficient approaches:
•An efficient variant using 4 stages (or 3 in the noiseless setting) was given
in [238].
•A noisy binary search approach was taken in [269], essentially correspond-
ing to a noisy counterpart of Hwang’s generalized binary splitting (see
Section 1.5). This approach was also shown to provide reductions in the
average number of tests experimentally, but a notable downside is that it
is ‘fully adaptive’ rather than having only a few stages.
(These approaches do not permit the slight improvement discussed in the cap-
tion of Figure 5.1.)
It remains an interesting question to close the remaining gaps between the
achievability and converse bounds in the noisy setting. While this discussion
pertains to the sublinear regimek= Θ(n α), exact thresholds have been estab-
lished in thelinear regimek= Θ(n) [152]; see Section 5.5 for an outline.
5.3. UNIVERSALITY AND COUNTING DEFECTIVES109
5.3 Universality and counting defectives
A natural consideration in group-testing is that ofuniversality– that is, how
robust the paradigm of group testing is to lack ofa prioriknowledge of the
number of defectivesk(or suitable upper and/or lower bounds). This question
arises naturally when nothing is known in advance regarding the statistical
process generating the defectives.
A related issue, as discussed in Section 1.7, is that for certain applications
the problem of interest is not to identify defective individualsK, but merely to
estimate their total numberk=|K|. This focus may arise because identifying
the individuals themselves is simply not necessary, is not desirable for reasons of
privacy, or is not feasible because of the impracticality of distinguishing between
test items (e.g., when studying insect populations).
The idea of counting the number of defectives using group testing dates
back at least as far as work of Thompson [270], with these original ideas being
developed in various works including [257], [282], [54] and [265]. We proceed by
discussing the adaptive setting, and then turn to the nonadaptive setting. In
both cases, we only consider noiseless group testing, since it has received by far
the most attention in the relevant literature.
5.3.1 Adaptive testing
We first highlight the work of Cheng [61, Theorem 3.1] for adaptive testing, in
which the following result was proved.
Theorem 5.6(Exact adaptive defective counting).For any parameterc >1,
there exists an adaptive algorithm that can find the exact number of defective
itemskwith probability at least1−1/k c−1, using a number of tests upper bounded
by
4k(⌈clog 2k+c⌉+ 2).(5.1)
Cheng’s argument is based on a recursive binary splitting argument remi-
niscent of the binary search technique of Algorithm 1.1. Given a setAthat
contains at least one defective, we randomly partition it via independent fair
coin flips into two subsetsA 1 andA 2 of roughly equal size. Note that this
construction is equivalent to takingp= 1/2 in (5.3). Observe that:
1. IfAcontains exactly one defective, one ofA 1 andA 2 will certainly contain
no defectives.
2. IfAcontainsd>1 defectives, the probability that all of these defectives
are placed in the same subsetA i is 1/2d−1≤1/2.
In the following, we discuss a method for reliably distinguishing these two cases.
Consider testing both subsetsA 1 andA 2. In case 1, one of the two tests will
certainly be negative. In case 2, the probability that there is a negative test is
at most 1/2 (since this only occurs if allddefectives lie in the same subset).
Furthermore, if we repeatedly and independently partitionAby using the
above coin-tossing procedurertimes, the outcomes will be independent between
partitions. Hence, our decision rule is simply to ask ‘did we seernegative tests?’.
In case 1, this certainly happens, and in case 2, the probability that this happens
is at most 1/2r. In other words, repeatedly randomly partitioningAin this way
110CHAPTER 5. OTHER TOPICS IN GROUP TESTING
allows us to efficiently distinguish cases 1 and 2. This allows us to eventually
partition the full set of items{1,2,...,n}into subsets, each of which contains
exactly one defective with high probability, so thatkis successfully identified.
A standard information-theoretic argument shows that, with no prior infor-
mation on the number of defectives, to estimate the exact value ofkwith zero
error probability will require at least log2(n+1) tests. In this sense, the question
of the optimal order of the number of tests required for exact recovery remains
open. Indeed, we note that individual testing of every item will give the exact
number of defectives inntests, which outperforms Cheng’s bound (5.1) in the
regime wherek= Θ(n).
However, as argued by Falahatgaret al.[113], the requirement to know the
number of defectivesexactlymay be unnecessarily restrictive. They developed
a four-stage adaptive algorithm, for which they proved that that anO(log logk)
expected number of tests achieves anapproximate recovery(ofk) criterion with
high probability [113, Theorem 15]. The algorithm works by successively refining
estimates, with each stage creating a better estimate with a certain probability
of error. The first stage finds an estimated number of defectives that (with
high probability) lies in the interval (k,k 2), and later stages tighten this to
(kϵ2,k/ϵ 2), then (k/4,4k), and finally ((1−η)k,(1 +η)k) for arbitrarily small
η >0, using binary search techniques.
Building on the algorithm of [113], Bshoutyet al.[44] improved the per-
formance guarantee by a constant factor, obtaining the following result [44,
Theorem 8].
Theorem 5.7(Approximate adaptive defective counting).For anyc >1,
δ∈(0,1)andη∈(0,1), there exists a four-stage adaptive algorithm providing
an estimate ofkthat, with probability at least1−δ, lies in the range
 
(1−
η)k,(1 +η)k

, using an expected number of tests satisfying
ET≤(1−δ+δ c) log2 (log2k) +O
 p
log logk

+O
 c
η2 log 1
δ

.(5.2)
Takingcarbitrarily large gives a leading term that is arbitrarily close to
(1−δ) log 2 (log2k). This result is essentially optimal, since [113, Theorem 16]
previously used Fano’s inequality to prove an information-theoretic lower bound
showing that any such algorithm requires at least (1−δ) log 2 (log2k)−1 tests.
A comparison between the log2(n+ 1) converse result for exact recovery and
the significantly tighterO(log logk) approximate recovery bound of Theorem
5.7 indicates that the criterion for successful recovery consistently makes a sig-
nificant difference in this case. Note that since any subsequent group testing
strategy to estimateKtypically requires Θ
 
klog 2
n
k

tests, it is highly desirable
to useo
 
klog 2
n
k

tests in the defective-counting stage, and this is achieved in
Theorem 5.7 but not Theorem 5.6 (unless logk=o(logn), which is a much
stronger requirement than the usualk=o(n)).
5.3.2 Nonadaptive testing
Before delving into nonadaptive strategies, we describe an idea based on random
Bernoulli testing that forms part of several such defective-counting papers:
5.3. UNIVERSALITY AND COUNTING DEFECTIVES111
•If there arekdefectives in some setA, and if each item inAlies in a
particular test independently with probabilityp, the test will be positive
with probability
1−(1−p) k.(5.3)
•Inverting this relationship, using Bernoulli designs with probability
p(ℓ) := 1−2 −1/ℓ,(5.4)
we would expect half the tests to be positive on average, if the true number
of defectiveskwas equal toℓ. Hence, using a Bernoulli design with param-
eterp(ℓ), if empirically we see many more (respectively, many fewer) than
half the tests being positive, then this is evidence thatk≫ℓ(respectively,
k≪ℓ).
While the above findings provide a useful starting point, a notable challenge as-
sociated with creating nonadaptive algorithms to count defectives is that (with-
out further information) any value ofk∈{0,1,...,n}is possible. Constructions
based on (5.4) for a particularp(ℓ) will struggle to distinguish between puta-
tive valuesk 1 andk 2 that are both far fromℓ. To overcome this, Damaschke
and Muhammad [89, Section 4] proposed a geometric construction, dividing the
range of tests into subintervals of exponentially increasing size and using a series
ofp(ℓ) values tailored to each subinterval.
To be more precise, the (nonadaptive) algorithm of [89] constructs parallel
group tests indexed by integerst. Each item lies in thet-th test independently
with probability
pt := 1−

1− 1
n
bt
,(5.5)
for some fixed positiveb>1. Using (5.3), this means that each test is negative
with probabilityqt := (1−1/n) btk. Hence, ift∗ is the largest index of a negative
pool, we may imagine thatq t∗≃1/2 and invert this to construct an estimate
ofk. More precisely, [89] propose an offset of this, taking
bk=− 1
bt∗−s log2
 
1− 1
n
,(5.6)
for an integers. The following result [89, Theorem 4.3] shows that (5.6) satisfies
certain success criteria.
Theorem 5.8(Approximate nonadaptive defective counting).For a given
value1 b∈(1,2]and integers, the estimate bkof(5.6)can be formed using
logbntests overall such that:
1.P( bk≤k) =O
  1
2bs logb

,
2.E( bk/k)≤b sF(b)for a certain explicit functionF. This functionFis
monotone increasing inb, withF(b)<1.466for allb≤2.
1We assume an upper boundb≤2 to simplify the theorem statement, but this could be
replaced by any absolute constant with only minor adjustments.
112CHAPTER 5. OTHER TOPICS IN GROUP TESTING
Observe that the first part bounds the probability that the estimate bkun-
derestimatesk, and the second part shows that bkoverestimateskby at most
an explicit constant factor on average.
In [88], the same authors use an argument based on a related hypothesis
testing problem to show that this Ω(logn) scaling in the number of tests is
essentially optimal. Specifically, for nonadaptive group testing any estimate
bkwith a specified underestimation probabilityP( bk≤k)≤ϵand bounded
‘competitive ratio’E(bk/k)≤crequires a multiple of logntests, with a constant
factor depending onϵandc[88, Theorem 1].
In subsequent work, Bshouty [42] showed how to strengthen Theorem 5.8,
building on the techniques developed in [89] and [113] to provide ahigh-probability
accuracy guarantee. In particular, [42, Theorem 7] states the following.
Theorem 5.9.Letη >0be a fixed constant, and consider a parameterδ >0
and number of defectiveskthat may vary withn. There exists a nonadaptive
procedure forming an estimate bkusingO
 
log 1
δ logn

tests (with theηdepen-
dence hidden inO(·)notation), with the property that
P
 
k≤ bk≤(1 +η)k

≥1−δ.(5.7)
Bshouty [43, Theorem 1] also provides a counterpart to the above-mentioned
result of [88]: namely, a lower bound on the number of tests required by any
(possibly randomized) algorithm to estimatekto within a constant factor. This
lower bound matches the upper bound in Theorem 5.9 to within a log log···logn
factor for an arbitrarily large number of composed logarithms.
Returning to the question of universality of group testing (that is, whether
we can recover the defective setKwith no prior knowledge ofk), we can regard
Bshouty’s algorithm [42] as the first stage of a two-stage universal algorithm. In
the second stage, we can design the tests using the resulting estimate ofk, and
use the second stage test results to determineK; as a specific example, we could
use the COMP algorithm under Bernoulli testing with parameterp= 1/ bk.
Under such a strategy, we could set the ‘error probability’δin the first stage
to, say,δ= 1/n, so that Theorem 5.9 givesO((logn) 2) scaling in the number
of tests. By comparison, recalling that COMP attains a positive rate when bkis
within a constant factor ofk(see Remark 2.3), the number of tests in the second
stage isO(klogn). Thus, the number of tests in the first stage is asymptotically
negligible by comparison provided thatk≫logn.
The preceding results (both adaptive and nonadaptive) are summarized in
Table 5.3.
5.3.3 Discussion
It is worth mentioning a fundamental limitation regarding the quest for univer-
sality: If we require the test design to be completely nonadaptive, then achieving
a positive rate whenk= Θ(n α) for someαprecludes achieving a positive rate
forα′ <α. This is because the former requirement needsn= Ω(n α logn) by the
counting bound, and any such scaling onngives zero rate forα ′ < α. Hence,
having at least some degree of adaptivity is essential to universally attaining a
positive rate.
On the other hand, if the number of defectives is known to be upper bounded
by some known valuek ∗, then under Bernoulli testing withp= 1/k ∗, the
5.3. UNIVERSALITY AND COUNTING DEFECTIVES113
References Recovery guarantee # Tests Adaptive?
[61] ExactO(klogk) yes
[113, 44] (1−η)k≤ bk≤(1 +η)k O(log logk) yes
[90] bk≥k,E( bk/k) =O(1)O(logn) no
[42]k≤ bk≤(1 +η)k O(logn) no
Table 5.3: Summary of recovery guarantees for counting defectives, depending
on the recovery criteria and availability of adaptive testing. The results here
correspond to the case of a constant nonzero error probability; the precise depen-
dencies on the error probability can be found in the above theorem statements.
analysis of COMP (see the Appendix to Chapter 1) leads to vanishing error
probability withT=O(k ∗ logn) tests, even if the true value ofkis much
smaller thank ∗. More specifically, this can be seen by settingp= 1/k ∗ in
(2.9), upper boundingk≤k ∗, and continuing the analysis withk ∗ in place of
k. Therefore, we still have guarantees on the performance when only an upper
bound onkis known, but we pay a penalty in the number of tests if that bound
is loose.
We note that a more general notion of universality could be taken with
respect to theprior distributionof defectives, which in general may be non-
uniform, may exhibit correlation or clustering structure, and so on (see Section
5.6 for an overview). However, universality with respect to such priors is likely
to be significantly more challenging compared to universality with respect to the
number of defectives alone, and we are unaware of any existing works attempting
this in group testing.
Broadly speaking, the above notions of universal group testing can be viewed
as a counterpart to information-theoretic problems of universal source coding,
where one does not have access to the underlying distribution of the source.
A prominent example of an adaptive universal source coding algorithm is that
of Lempel and Ziv, which achieves asymptotically optimal compression for any
stationary ergodic source by parsing strings into trees (e.g., see [83, Chapter
13], [203, Section 6.4]).
There may also be uncertainty regarding the group testing setup in other
senses beyond those discussed above. In particular, in the noisy settings of
Chapter 4.6, we may lack information regarding the parameters of the particular
noise model, or even which model applies. The problem of decoding with no
knowledge of the noise model was referred to as ‘blind group testing’ in the
work of Huleihel, Elishco, and M´ edard [156], who proved universal variants of
the information-theoretic joint and separate decoding rules (see Sections 4.6 and
3.5 respectively). In the sparse regime withα→0, they show that their decoders
achieve the same asymptotic performance as when the channel is known. An
earlier work of Malyutov and Sadaka [211] showed such a result in the very
sparse regimek=O(1).
Again, we can connect this with classical information-theoretic results, namely,
for the problem of universal channel coding. Here a transmitter seeks to send
a message over a noisy channel, despite not having precise channel statistics
114CHAPTER 5. OTHER TOPICS IN GROUP TESTING
other than a guarantee that its capacity exceeds the transmission rate. The
maximum empirical mutual information decoder (e.g., see [84, p. 100]) is the
most well-known decoding method for this scenario, and such a decoder was in
fact adopted for group testing in [211]. The decoder adopted in [156] is slightly
different, but still based on empirical probability measures.
5.4 Sublinear-time algorithms
The decoding algorithms such as COMP and DD (but not SSS) studied in
Chapters 2 and 3 are efficient, in the sense that they operate in timeO(nT).
However, in the case thatnis extremely large, or practical considerations require
a very fast decoding rule, it is of interest to seek algorithms that reduce this
runtime further.
To address this question, a recent line of works has consideredsublinear-time
algorithmsthat run in time that is linear or polynomial inklogn, rather than
inn. We know from the counting bound thatO(klogn) tests are needed, and
if it takes a constant amount of time to read each test result, then the decoding
time cannot be reduced belowO(klogn).
Early works on sublinear-time decoding for group testing focused on the
zero-error recovery criterion [62, 166, 225], possibly with adversarial noise [62].
Typical results in these works state that withT=O(k 2 logn) tests (which is
nearly order-optimal under the zero-error recovery criterion; see Section 1.6),
one can attain a decoding time of the formO(T c) for somec>1.
Our focus in this manuscript is on the small-error recovery criterion, as
opposed to zero-error, and we therefore focus on more recent algorithms targeted
at this setting. We immediately see that we cannot directly rely on the main
ideas used in Chapters 2 and 3; for instance:
•Merely traversing the entries of a Bernoulli test matrix requires Ω(nT)
time. Structured test matrices often permit faster computation, but the
only structure inherent in the Bernoulli(p) case is sparsity, and there are
still Ω(nlogn) entries equal to one in the case thatT= Ω(klogn) and
p= Θ
  1
k

.
•Both COMP and DD use the idea of marking items as nondefective if they
appear in a negative test. However, individually markingn−kitems (or
even just a constant fraction thereof) as nondefective already requires
linear time.
The first observation suggests either using a highly structured test design, in
particular adopting a scheme where the decoder does not need to read the entire
test matrix. The second observation suggests that achieving sublinear runtime
requires using a decoding algorithm that positively identifies defective items
and/or that efficiently marks large numbers of items as being nondefective all
at once; doing so one-by-one is no longer feasible.
We note that the notion of ‘sublinear time’ here applies purely to the decod-
ing algorithm. Indeed, if we assume that placing an item in a test takes constant
time, thenencodingobviously requires at least linear time in total, if each item
is tested at least once. Thus, sublinear time algorithms will be of interest in the
case that the encoding work naturally parallelizes over thenelements, and/or
the decoding time poses more of a bottleneck.
5.4. SUBLINEAR-TIME ALGORITHMS115
In this section, we discuss two schemes for group testing with sublinear-time
decoding time and arbitrarily small error probability:
SAFFRON[187] is a scheme for nonadaptive noiseless testing based on sparse-
graph codes. It requires a number of tests and runtime both of order
O(klogklogn). We also discuss an approximate recovery result, and
briefly mention a variant for the noisy setting.
GROTESQUE[49] is a scheme with three variants: adaptive, two-stage, and
nonadaptive. All three variants work for both the noiseless and noisy
settings. The adaptive variant performsO(klogn) tests and requires
O(klogn) runtime, with the former in particular amounting to a posi-
tive rate. In addition, the two-stage variant achieves a positive rate for
some scaling regimes ofk.
At the end of the section, we also discuss some more recent approaches that are
known to achieve a positive rate for exact recovery in the nonadaptive setting,
unlike SAFFRON and GROTESQUE.
To the best of our knowledge, GROTESQUE appeared in the literature prior
to SAFFRON. However, we find it natural to first present a simplified form of
SAFFRON that is the easiest to analyse, and then move on to the various forms
of GROTESQUE.
5.4.1 SAFFRON
SAFFRON is a scheme for nonadaptive group testing with sublinear decoding
time due to Lee, Pedarsani and Ramtin [187]. It is based on sparse-graph codes,
which were also used earlier in other sparse signal recovery problems (e.g., see
[191]). We present here the simple ‘singleton-only SAFFRON’ version of the
scheme.
The basic idea is as follows: TheTtests are split into ‘bundles’ of size 2m,
wherem=⌈log 2n⌉∼log 2n. Each item is chosen to either ‘appear’ or ‘not
appear’ in each bundle. Specifically, items appear in bundles according to an
outer Bernoulli design, where each item appears in each bundle independently
with probabilityp.
If itemiit does not appear in a given bundle, then it is absent from
all 2mtests in that bundle. If itemidoes appear in a given bundle, it is
placed in the tests within that bundle that correspond to the 1s in the vec-
tor
 
b(i), b(i)

∈ {0,1}2m, whereb(i)∈ {0,1} m is the binary expansion of
the numberi, and b(i) =1−b(i) isb(i) with the 0s and 1s reversed. Note
that since the vector
 
b(i), b(i)

always has weightm, any item appearing in a
bundle is in exactlymtests within that bundle. The idea of encoding binary
expansions into tests/measurements was also used earlier in studies of sparse
recovery with linear measurements (e.g., see [138] and the references therein).
We now describe the decoder. When considering the outputs from a given
bundle of 2mtests, we first look at the the weight of those outputs – that is,
the number of positive outcomes within the bundle. If the weight is 0, then no
defective items appeared in the bundle; if the weight is exactlym, then precisely
one defective item appeared in the bundle; if the weight is greater thanm, then
two or more defective items appeared in the bundle. The simplified (singleton-
only) SAFFRON decoder considers only those bundles containing precisely one
116CHAPTER 5. OTHER TOPICS IN GROUP TESTING
defective. The firstmoutputs from such a bundle give the binary expansion
of the label of the defective item, which is therefore immediately identifiable.
Repeating this process for each bundle collects a number of defective items,
which form our estimate of the defective set.
The key point here is that the SAFFRON decoder firstdetectsa bundle
containing exactly one defective item, by calculating the output weight, then
affirmativelyidentifiesthat defective item, using the binary expansion. Thus,
it does not rely on ruling out nondefective items, which takes at least linear
time if done one-by-one. Note also that while it would take more than linear
time to explicitly read the Bernoulli outer design, it is not necessary to do so,
as defective items identify themselves through their binary expansion.
We then have the following result.
Theorem 5.10.Consider standard nonadaptive group testing withnitems,k
defectives, andTtests. Singleton-only SAFFRON succeeds at exact recovery
with probability approaching 1 provided that
T≥(1 +η) 2eklnk·log 2n
for someη >0, and the decoding time isO(klogklogn).
Furthermore, we have the following approximate recovery result: The out-
put of SAFFRON contains at least(1−γ)kdefective items with probability
approaching1provided that
T≥(1 +η) 2ekln
 1
γ

log2n
for someη >0, and the decoding time isO(klog(1/γ) logn).
In both of the above cases, with probability1, there are no false positives: the
output is a subset of the defective set.
This result is slightly different from the main result in [187], but readily
follows from the arguments therein. We also note a subtle point that the decod-
ing time depends on the model of computation. The scaling laws are as stated
above when it takes a unit amount of time to read each test result, but it was
noted in [232] that under aword-RAM modelof computation, we can interpret
the test results as a sequence of length-O(logn) ‘words’, each of which can be
read and processed inO(1) time. Under this model, the decoding time reduces
by a lognfactor.
We briefly discuss how the above statements on the number of tests translate
into achievable rates whenk= Θ(n α) withα∈(0,1). In the case of exact
recovery, the number of tests is a logarithmic factor higher than the optimal
scaling, so the rate is zero. However, the approximate recovery result has a
positive rate for fixedγ∈(0,1), namely,
1
2e ln 1
γ
(1−α)≃ 0.184
ln 1
γ
(1−α).
We observe also that this rate tends to zero asγ→0.
Proof sketch.We sketch a proof based on the coupon collector problem. WriteB
for the number of bundles, recalling thatT= 2mB∼2Blog 2n. By picking the
5.4. SUBLINEAR-TIME ALGORITHMS117
Bernoulli parameter asp= 1/k, we maximize the average number of bundles
containing exactly one defective, and by standard concentration bounds, the
actual number is close to the resulting average e−1Bwith high probability.
For exact recovery, we need to ‘collect’ allkdefective items. The standard
coupon collector problem states that we requireklnksuch bundles to collect
thekitems (see Remark 2.2). Hence, we need e −1B∼klnk, and thusT∼
2eklnklog 2n.
For the approximate recovery criterion, another standard coupon collector
result states that that collecting (1−γ)kcoupons out ofkrequireskln(1/γ)
such bundles. The result then follows in the same way.
For each bundle, the outputs are read in timeO(logn), the weight computed
in timeO(logn), and the single defective – if there is one – identified in time
O(logn). Hence, the running time for the decoder isO(Blogn) =O(T), which
isO(klogklogn) for exact recovery andO(klog(1/γ) logn) for approximate
recovery.
We re-iterate that the above result concerns the simplified ‘singleton-only’
SAFFRON scheme; the full SAFFRON scheme of [187] improves the constant
factors in the results of Theorem 5.10 as follows: When a bundle contains two
defective items, one of which has been identified elsewhere (e.g., via the singleton
approach), the second defective can be then also be identified with high prob-
ability. The outer Bernoulli design is also replaced by a design with constant
bundles-per-item.
In addition, the authors of [187] give a ‘robustified SAFFRON’ algorithm
for noisy group testing. Here, the vectors
 
b(i), b(i)

are extended with the
parity-check bits of a positive-rate code in order to provide robustness to noise.
The resulting scheme is similar to the nonadaptive variant of GROTESQUE
described below.
5.4.2 GROTESQUE
In this subsection, we give an overview of another sublinear-time algorithm
called GROTESQUE (Group Testing, Quick and Efficient) due to Cai, Jahang-
oshahi, Bakshi and Jaggi [49]. This approach uses expander codes [262] in its
construction, thus highlighting that efficient channel codes (e.g., see [235]) can
play a role in practical group testing constructions, and complementing the
extensive use of information theory for theoretical studies of group testing.
Overview of results
There are three variations of GROTESQUE with different guarantees on the
number of tests and decoding time, corresponding to the fully adaptive, two-
stage adaptive, and nonadaptive settings. We first summarize the respective
performance guarantees, and then give an overview of the algorithms themselves.
Theorem 5.11.There exists an adaptive variant of GROTESQUE usingO(logn)
stages of adaptivity that achieves vanishing error probability, performsO(klogn)
tests, and requiresO(klogn)decoding time.
Observe that this result gives optimal scaling laws whenk= Θ(n α) with
α <1. In particular, the algorithm achieves a positive rate in this regime;
118CHAPTER 5. OTHER TOPICS IN GROUP TESTING
however, the rate itself may be low according to the existing proof, which does
not optimize the constant factors.
Theorem 5.12.There exists a nonadaptive variant of GROTESQUE that
achieves vanishing error probability withO(klognlogk)tests andO(k(logn+
log2k))decoding time.
Observe that the number of tests matches that of SAFFRON up to constant
factors. In particular, although the rate is zero, the scaling laws are only a
log factor away from optimality. While it may seem unusual for the number
of tests to exceed the decoding time (e.g., whenk=O(logn)), the idea is
that the algorithm can ‘adaptively’ decide which test outcomes to observe, and
ultimately leave some tests unobserved.
Theorem 5.13.A two-stage adaptive variant of GROTESQUE achieves van-
ishing error probability withO(k(logn+ log 2k))tests andO(k(logn+ log 2k))
decoding time.
This result improves on the number of tests used by the nonadaptive algo-
rithm, and achieves a positive rate whenever log 2k=O(logn). Note, however,
that this condition is not satisfied in the regimek= Θ(n α) (withα∈(0,1)),
which has been the focus of most of this monograph.
We briefly mention that all of the above guarantees hold not only in the
noiseless setting, but also for the symmetric noise model with a fixed crossover
probability in
 
0, 1
2

.
Overview of the algorithm variants
The basic building block of all three variants of the algorithm are two types of
‘tests’ (in the general sense of the word, rather than the sense of a single group
test) that operate on subsets of{1,...,n}, described as follows.
Multiplicity testAmultiplicity testconsiders a subsetSof items of size
n′ <n, and only seeks to establish whether the number of defective items in the
subset is 0, 1, or more than 1. To do this, we performT mul =O(logn) tests,
where each item inSis included in each test independently with probability 1
2.
It is easy to show (see also (5.3)–(5.4) above) that the following holds for each
such test:
•IfShas no defective items, the output must be 0 (noiseless case), or have
a probability strictly less than 1
2 of being 1 (noisy case).
•IfShas one defective item, the output is equal to 0 or 1 with probability
exactly 1
2 each.
•IfShas more than one defective item, then the output equals 1 with
probability at least 3
4 (noiseless case), or with probability strictly higher
than 1
2 (noisy case).
Therefore, by standard concentration bounds, we can correctly categorizeSinto
these three categories with probability at least 1−O
  1
nc

(for any fixedc>0)
usingO(logn) tests.
Notice that the reason that this procedure can be done efficiently is that we
pay no attention to which items are included in each test; we merely count the
number of positive and negative test outcomes.
5.4. SUBLINEAR-TIME ALGORITHMS119
Location testAfter a multiplicity test is performed on a subsetS, we only
apply this step toSif the set is found to contain exactly one defective item.
If this is indeed the case, we perform alocation testto deduce the indexi∈
{1,...,n}of that defective item.
To do this, we perform another set ofT loc =O(logn) tests onS, but this
time we use a structured ‘test submatrix’ of sizeT loc×|S|. Specifically, we let
the columns of this matrix be the codewords of an expander code [262]; each
codeword encodes the associated item index. We do not give the details of such
a code, but instead highlight its desirable properties:
•The decoding time is linear in the block length (i.e.,O(logn));
•The error probability decays exponentially in the block length (i.e.,O(n−c)
for somec>0);
•The rate is constant (i.e., an item index in{1,...,n}can be reliably
identified with a block lengthO(logn));
•The code is robust to independent random bit flips (i.e., symmetric noise)
and/or erasures.
These properties suffice to perform a single location test sufficiently reliably
usingO(logn) tests andO(logn) runtime, even in the presence of random noise.
In SAFFRON above, the bundles consisting of binary expansions vectors
work a lot like the multiplicity and location step here: A bundle having output
weight exactlymcertifies that it contains exactly one defective (multiplicity
test withT mul = 2m∼2 log 2n), and reading off the binary expansion ‘localizes’
the defective item (with no extra steps).
With the preceding building blocks in place, we can now describe the three
variations of the algorithm.
Adaptive algorithmThe adaptive algorithm usesJ=O(logn) stages of
adaptivity, with all stages except the last using a common procedure. Specif-
ically, the goal of the firstJ−1 stages is to identify all except at most log 2k
defective items. Lettingk i denote the number of unresolved defective items
before thei-th stage, we randomly partition then−k+k i items (excluding re-
solved defectives) into 2ki groups, and perform a multiplicity test on each such
group.
By standard concentration via McDiarmid’s inequality [216], it can be shown
that with high probability, a constant fraction of the groups contain a single
defective item. Assuming the multiplicity tests are successful (which occurs
with high probability), all such groups are identified, and the corresponding
defective item can then be found via a location test.
When the number of remaining defectivesk i falls sufficiently below log 2n,
the desired concentration behaviour starts to fail to hold. To address this, in
the final stage, we formO((logk) 2 log logk) groups, each containingO
  n
logk

unresolved items chosen uniformly at random. These choices of scaling laws,
with suitably-chosen implied constants, ensure that each unresolved defective
appears in at least one group by itself with high probability. As a result, we can
identify these remaining items via multiplicity and location tests as above.
By the fact that the number of unresolved defectives decays geometrically in
the firstJ−1 stages, it can be shown that these stages collectively only require
120CHAPTER 5. OTHER TOPICS IN GROUP TESTING
O(klogn) tests and runtime. The final stage requiresO((logk) 2 log logklogn)
tests and runtime, which is strictly smaller thanO(klogn).
Nonadaptive algorithmThe simplest way to make the algorithm nonadap-
tive is to note that, since the first stage identifies a random constant fraction
of the defective items, repeating that stage independentlyO(logn) times is
enough to identify all defective items with high probability. This approach
gives theO(klogklogn) number of tests stated in Section 5.4.2, but requires
O(klogklogn) runtime instead of the improvedO(k(logn+log 2k)). To achieve
the latter, one adopts a more sophisticated approach that adaptively chooses
which tests to observe; we refer the reader to [49] for details.
Two-stage algorithmOnce the previously-mentioned guarantees of the non-
adaptive algorithm are in place, analysing the two-stage algorithm is straightfor-
ward. In the first stage, one randomly partitions thenitems intok 3 bins. Since
there arekdefective items, a standard ‘birthday paradox’ argument (see for
example [117, p. 33]) reveals that with high probability, each such bin contains
either 0 or 1 defective items.
In the first stage, a ‘grouped group testing’ procedure is applied withk 3
‘super-items’. Each super-item corresponds to an entire bin, and testing a super-
item amounts to including all the bin’s items in the test simultaneously. Using
the above nonadaptive algorithm accordingly withk 3 in place ofn, we see
that we can reliably identify thekdefective bins usingO(klog 2k) tests and
runtime. In the second stage, we simply apply the location test separately to
each defective bin, thereby identifying thekdefective items usingO(klogn)
tests and runtime.
Discussion
The GROTESQUE algorithm, as described above, assumes exact knowledge of
k. However, as highlighted in [49], it can be adapted to the case thatkis only
known up to a constant factor. As we saw in Section 5.3, such knowledge can
be attained with probability at least 1−δusing one extra stage of adaptivity
with onlyO
 
lognlog 1
δ

tests (Theorem 5.9).
As we have hinted earlier, there are significant conceptual similarities be-
tween SAFFRON and the nonadaptive version of GROTESQUE, and elements
of the two could be combined. For example, in the noiseless case, one could
forgo the expander code in GROTESQUE and use the simpler bit-expansion
approach of SAFFRON.
A related adaptive algorithm calledisolate-and-identifywas also proposed
by Wang and Guruswami [286], usingO(logk) rounds of adaptivity and notably
attaining explicit constants in the number of tests (with asymptotic tightness
in sufficiently sparse regimes such ask= (logn) O(1)), at the expense of the
decoding time having an additional logarithmic factor.
A subtle point is that the decoding time for expander codes typically refers to
the time to recover the codeword, rather than the time to recover the message.
Nevertheless, the decoding times stated above remain justified due to the fact
that the mapping from codewords to messages (that is, item indices) can be
found viapre-processing, which is done completely offline. Alternatively, if such
pre-processing is too expensive (for example, becausenis very large), one can
5.4. SUBLINEAR-TIME ALGORITHMS121
# Tests Decoding time Adaptive?
SAFFRONO(klogklogn)O(klogklogn) no
GROTESQUEO(klogklogn)O(klogn+klog 2k) no
2-GROTESQUEO(klogn+klog 2k)O(klogn+klog 2k) two-stage
A-GROTESQUEO(klogn)O(klogn) yes
Kautz–SingletonO
 
klognlog logn
logk

O
 
k3 lognlog logn
logk

no
BMCO(klogn)O(k 2 logklogn) no
Binary splittingO(klogn)O(klogn) no
Table 5.4: Summary of number of tests and decoding times for sublinear-
time group testing algorithms in the small-error setting. ‘2-GROTESQUE’
and ‘A-GROTESQUE’ refer to the two-stage and fully adaptive versions of
GROTESQUE, and the other rows are as described above. Under a word-RAM
model of computation, the decoding time of SAFFRON can be improved to
O(klogk) [232].
perform the mapping in an online manner with only a slightly increased decoding
time. Specifically, even a naive matrix multiplication to map the codeword
to the message only requires time quadratic in the block length (rather than
linear), thus only incurring an additionalO(logn) factor in the decoding time
of GROTESQUE.
5.4.3 Attaining a positive rate with nonadaptive testing
A notable limitation of the theoretical guarantees of SAFFRON and the non-
adaptive variant of GROTESQUE is that the number of tests isO(klogklogn),
meaning that the rate is zero unlessk=O(1). Here we briefly highlight two
recent works that improved the number of tests at the expense of a higher de-
coding time, and then another approach that attainsO(klogn) scaling in both.
The results are summarized in Table 5.4.
Order-optimal tests and higher decoding timeIn [163], a classical con-
struction of Kautz and Singleton [179] was adapted from the zero-error set-
ting to the small-error setting, and was shown to permit exact recovery with
T=O(klognlog logn
logk ) tests andO(k 3 lognlog logn
logk ) decoding time. The
Kautz-Singleton construction is a type ofconcatenated code, and will be dis-
cussed in more detail in Section 5.7. The preceding number of tests amounts
to a positive rate wheneverk= Θ(n α) for someα∈(0,1), but not in sparser
regimes such ask=O((logn) c) (for fixedc>0).
The problem of attaining exact recovery withT=O(klogn) and sublinear
decoding time without further assumptions onkwas first solved by Bondorfet
al.[37] via an approach termedbit-mixing coding(BMC). This technique tests
random ‘bundles’ of items analogously to SAFFRON; the distinction is that
instead of seeking to ensure that each defective is the unique one in some bundle
corresponding toO(logn) tests, BMC allows each defective item’s index to be
encoded inO(logn) tests withcollisionsbetween the different defective items.
122CHAPTER 5. OTHER TOPICS IN GROUP TESTING
Defective
Non-Defective
Defective
Non-Defective
Level 0
Level 1
Level 2
Level 3
Level 4
Figure 5.2: Example partitioning of items used for the nonadaptive binary split-
ting algorithm, withn= 16 items andk= 3 defectives. In the left figure, each
level consists of splitting the previous level’s groups into two groups of half the
size. The right figure shows and equivalent tree structure, where leaves corre-
spond to individual items and other nodes correspond to group of items, with
the root containing all items.
As long as a constant fraction of these tests remains collision-free for each item,
the collisions can be controlled using erasure-correcting coding techniques; see
[37] for details. The decoding time of BMC isO(k 2 logklogn), which improves
on that of [163], but remains higher than that of SAFFRON and GROTESQUE
by a factor ofk.
Order-optimal tests and matching decoding timeThe techniques sur-
veyed thus far attain various trade-offs between the number of tests and the
decoding time, but none of thenonadaptivestrategies attainO(klogn) in both.
This goal was attained in the concurrent works of Price and Scarlett [232] and
Cheraghchi and Nakos [67]. The strategies in the two papers are essentially the
same, but we follow [232] more closely in our presentation here.
The strategy can be viewed as roughly emulating Hwang’s generalized binary
splitting algorithm (described in Section 1.5), while performing all the required
tests in advance rather than adaptively. First, we view the items as being recur-
sively partitioned in levels, as illustrated in Figure 5.2 along with an equivalent
binary tree representation. Level 0 contains a single group with allnitems,
Level 1 contains two groups of sizen/2, and so on, up to level log 2ncontain-
ing individual items. (Here we ignore rounding issues for notational simplicity.)
The testing strategy is as follows:
•For levelℓ= log 2k,...,log 2n−1, formCktests for a suitable constant
C >0, and place each group of that level into one of the tests uniformly
random (where ‘placing a group’ means placing all its items).
•For levelℓ= log 2n, formC ′ logkbundles of 2ktests (2C ′klogktests
total), and for each item and each bundle, place the item into a uniformly
random test among the 2ktests in that bundle.
Observe that this givesO(klogn) tests in total.
Once these tests are performed, the decoding strategy is based on a simple
COMP-like approach (see Section 2.3) that starts from levelℓ= log 2k, keeps
5.4. SUBLINEAR-TIME ALGORITHMS123
only the groups appearing in positive tests, and then recursively works down to
the final level, discarding any groups that test negative. That is, at each level,
we keep track of thepossibly defectivegroups, and only consider the ‘children’
(from binary splitting) of those groups at the next level. The analysis of [232]
shows that with high probability, onlyO
 
klog n
k

nodes in the binary tree are
‘visited’ (that is, considered as possible defectives), and by the final level there
are onlyO(k) possibly defective leaf nodes. The final estimate is then formed by
again using COMP decoding (restricted to the possible defectives) on the final
level’s tests. Throughout the course of the algorithm, the only test results that
need to be checked are the ones that the possibly defective nodes are placed in,
thus yielding a decoding time ofO
 
klog n
k

+O(klogk) =O(klogn).
Formally, a simplified version of the main result of [232] (see also [67]) is
stated as follows.
Theorem 5.14.The binary splitting algorithm described above, with suitable
choices of the constantsCandC ′, achieves asymptotically vanishing error prob-
ability withO(klogn)tests andO(klogn)decoding time.
The algorithm and its associated guarantee have also been extended in sev-
eral interesting directions:
•Wang, Gabrys, and Guruswami [284] developed a variant of the above
strategy with a more careful design and analysis that explicitly controls the
constant factors in the number of tests, and showed that the constant can
be made arbitrarily close to that of COMP (Section 2.3) while maintaining
O(klogn) decoding time. In addition, whenk≤O( √n), they showed
that with a modified decoder, the constant can be further improved to
be arbitrarily close to that of DD (Section 2.4) withO(k 2 logn) decoding
time.
•Price and Scarlett [232] showed that the uniform random placements can
be replaced by suitably-chosen hash functions to attain sublinear storage
guarantees, at the expense of only a log-factor increase in the decoding
time.
•Cheraghchi and Nakos [67] additionally gave variations for other problems
such as compressed sensing and heavy hitters.
•Price, Scarlett, and Tan [233] gave extensions to the noisy setting, as
well as a setting with a constrained number of tests per item (see Section
5.8). In particular, in the noisy setting with symmetric noise (Example
3.1), they showed that a suitable variation of the above strategy succeeds
with high probability usingO(klogn) tests andO
  
klog n
k
1+ϵ
decoding
time, for arbitrarily smallϵ >0. The noisy setting was further studied
by Li and Mazumdar [190], whose findings include (i) handling addition
noise (Example 3.2) while maintainingO(klogn) decoding time, and (ii) a
refined algorithm that reduces logarithmic terms in the decoding time
compared to [233] under symmetric noise.
Regarding the last of these points, while attainingO(klogn) scaling in both
the number of tests and decoding time remains an open problem in the noisy
setting, Guruswami and Wang [146] provided a strategy termedGachabased
124CHAPTER 5. OTHER TOPICS IN GROUP TESTING
on list decoding and error-correcting codes, which improves the decoding time
fromO
  
klog n
k
1+ϵ
toO(k(logn) O(1)) in sufficiently sparse scaling regimes,
as well as attaining other novel trade-offs between the number of tests, decoding
time, and rate of false positives and negatives.
5.5 The linear regime
Throughout this survey, we have focused on the sparse regime, where the number
of defective itemskscales ask=o(n), specificallyk= Θ(n α) withα <1.
However, for many real-world applications, it may be more realistic to assume
that each item has a constant probability of being defective asn→∞, rather
than probability tending to 0. For example, we might assume each soldier has
a probabilityβof having syphilis, but we would not expect this probability to
decrease as more soldiers join. Along similar lines, disease prevalence (such as
for Covid-19) is invariably reported using percentages, and not using ‘sublinear’
notions such as square roots (although sublinear models via Heap’s law have
been proposed for modelling early stages of pandemics [289]).
In this section, we turn our attention to such linear scaling regimes; specifi-
cally, we are interested in the asymptotic behaviour of the required number of
tests whenk= Θ(n). It will turn out that, in contrast to the sparse regime
k= Θ(n α) withα<1, the constant term in front of thenis important; thus, we
will consider a limiting regime wherek∼βn, by which we mean thatk/n→β,
for some constantβ∈(0,1).
The theory of group testing in this regime turns out to be decidedly different
to the sparse regime studied throughout the monograph. We first note that in
contrast to (1.11), the term log 2
 n
k

from the counting bound (Theorem 1.1)
behaves in this regime as [81, p. 1187]
log2
n
k

∼nh
k
n

∼nh(β),(5.8)
which is linear inn. (Here, as before,his the binary entropy function.) Hence,
for algorithms having a nonzero rate, we seek a number of tests scaling as
T=O(n) =O(k). In contrast, algorithms and designs requiringT= Ω(klogn)
tests, as we found before, will have rate 0.
Moreover, we see here that simply testing each item individually inT=n
tests gives a positive rate of
log2
 n
k

T = log2
 n
k

n →h(β).(5.9)
In fact, under the combinatorial prior (see Section 1.1) in whichkis known, we
only requireT=n−1 tests, since we will know whether or not the final item
is defective by whether we have foundk−1 orkdefectives so far. This still
has rateh(β), of course. Henceforth, we use the word ‘optimal’ to mean ‘has
an optimal rate’ to avoid considering such ‘second-order’ behaviour.
Combining (5.9) with the counting bound, we see that the capacityC=C(β)
(or zero-error capacityC 0) of group testing in the linear regime is bounded by
h(β)≤C(β)≤1.
In fact, we will see in this section that for nonadaptive testing, individ-
ual testing is optimal, and so we have equality with the lower boundC(β) =
5.5. THE LINEAR REGIME125
C0(β) =h(β). Even for adaptive testing, individual testing is optimal for large
β, but it can be improved for smallβ.
In the rest of this section, we briefly discuss results for group testing with
varying degrees of adaptivity. Recall that under the combinatorial prior we have
exactlyk=k(n) defectives, withk/n→β, while under the i.i.d. prior each item
is independently defective with probabilityβ. The results are summarized as
follows:
Nonadaptive:For both the zero-error combinatorial model and the small-error
i.i.d. model, individual testing is optimal for allβ∈(0,1), so the capacity
isC 0(β) =C(β) =h(β).
Two-stage:When we define rate with respect to the average number of tests,
the rate achieved increases from ln 2≃0.693 to 1 asβvaries from 0 to
1/2, and a converse bound shows that this rate is nearly optimal among
so-called ‘conservative’ two-stage algorithms [14], which will be defined
below.
Adaptive:
Zero-error combinatorialIndividual testing is optimal forβ≥1−
log3 2≈0.369, givingC 0(β) =h(β), and this is conjectured to be
true for allβ≥1/3. Forβ <1/3, there are algorithms giving rates
that exceedh(β), so individual testing is suboptimal [234, 155, 13].
Small-error i.i.d.Letβ ∗ = (3−
√
5)/2≈0.382. Individual testing
is optimal forβ≥β ∗ givingC(β) =h(β). Forβ < β ∗, there are
algorithms giving rates that exceedh(β), so individual testing is sub-
optimal [119, 13].
We also briefly discuss noisy settings in Section 5.5.4.
5.5.1 Nonadaptive testing
We begin with the nonadaptive setting. The optimality of individual testing for
zero-errorrecovery has long been known via the results discussed in Section 1.6.
Perhaps more surprisingly, the same is also true under the small-error criterion;
this was first shown under the i.i.d. prior by Aldridge [12]. (This result improved
on an earlier converse result of Agarwal, Jaggi and Mazumdar [3].)
Theorem 5.15.Consider nonadaptive group testing with an i.i.d. prior where
each of thenitems is independently defective with a given probabilityβ∈(0,1),
independent ofn. Suppose we useT < ntests. Then there exists a constant
ϵ=ϵ(β)>0, independent ofn, such that the average error probability is at least
ϵ.
The key idea of [12] is the following: Suppose that some itemiismasked
(or in the terminology of [12],totally disguised), in that every test containing
ialso contains a defective item distinct fromi. Then every test containingiis
positive, regardless of whetheriis defective or nondefective. Thus, we cannot
know whetheriis defective or not. (We used this idea earlier in this monograph
when analysing SSS in Section 2.2 and also in Section 4.5; but, chronologically,
the tools were developed first for the linear regime in [12].) In the linear regime,
126CHAPTER 5. OTHER TOPICS IN GROUP TESTING
we either guess thatiis defective, and are correct with probabilityβ; guess that
iis nondefective, and are correct with probability 1−β; or take a random choice
between the two. In any case, the error probability is bounded below by the
constant min{β,1−β}>0. Thus, we can attain a converse bound by showing
that, again with probability bounded away from 0, there is such a masked item
i. The probability that itemiis masked is lower bounded as follows:
P(Di)≥
Y
t:x ti=1
 
1−(1−β) wt−1
,(5.10)
wherew t is the number of items in testt(that is, the weight of testt). The
bound (5.10) can easily be shown using the FKG inequality [12, Lemma 4], and
an elementary but longer proof is given in [3, Lemma 4].
The proof of Theorem 5.15 given in [12] first shows that whenT < none
can assume, without loss of generality, that there are no tests of weight 0 or
1. It then uses (5.10) to show that, for any design withw t≥2 for allt, the
mean of the log-probability logP(Di), averaged over all itemsi, is bounded away
from−∞. Hence,someitem certainly has a probability of being masked that
is bounded away from zero, thus proving the theorem.
While Theorem 5.15 shows that the error probability is bounded away from
0, the given bound on the error probability can be very small, particularly as
βdecreases [12]. To address this, a refinement of the result was established
by Bay, Price, and Scarlett [31], stating that ifT <(1−η)nfor arbitrarily
smallη >0, then the error probability in fact approaches one asn→ ∞.
Moreover, they showed that this is the case not only in the linear regime, but
also in ‘mildly sublinear’ regimes in whichk=ω
  n
logn

. On the more positive
side, when one moves from exact recovery toapproximate recovery(see Section
5.1), one can significantly outperform individual testing, particularly when the
sparsity parameterβis small. We omit a detailed discussion here, and refer the
interested reader to the work of Tan, Tan, and Scarlett [268] for the details.
5.5.2 Two-stage testing
We now turn to two-stage testing. We consider the average-case number of
tests and the notion of rate defined with respect to this average; so we are
using log2
 n
k

/ETas the rate in (1.12), where a fixed number of tests has been
replaced by its expected valueET.
Dorfman’s strategy
Dorfman’s two-stage algorithm, whose weakness in the sparse regime we previ-
ously discussed in Section 1.5, becomes competitive again in the linear regime.
Recall that Dorfman’s algorithm starts by splitting thenitems inton/mpools
ofmitems (ignoring rounding issues) for some parameterm. Each of these pool
is tested. If the test of a pool is negative, we know that themitems are all
nondefective; if the test is positive, we then test each of themitems individually
to discover their status. This is a two-stage algorithm because we can perform
then/mpooled tests in stage 1 and all the individual tests in stage 2.
The number of tests this uses depends on the defectivity prior:
5.5. THE LINEAR REGIME127
•Under the combinatorial prior withk∼βn, Dorfman’s algorithm takes,
in the worst case,
T= n
m +km=
 1
m +βm

n(5.11)
tests, since the least favourable outcome is for thekdefective items to all
be different pools, requiringkmstage-2 tests. Withm= 2, this improves
on individual testing forβ < 1
4.
•Under the i.i.d. prior with parameterβ, Dorfman’s algorithm takes on
average
ET= n
m
 
1 + (1−(1−β) m)m

=
 1
m + 1−(1−β) m

n(5.12)
tests: each pool requires 1 test in the first round, each pool is positive with
probability 1−(1−β) m, and for each positive outcome there are another
mindividual tests in the second round. Withm= 3, this improves on
individual testing forβ <1−3 −1/3≈0.307. (It turns out thatm= 2 is
never optimal here, as it is always beaten by eitherm= 3 or individual
testing.)
Conservative two-stage testing
We now consider a more general class of strategies of which Dorfman’s strategy
is a special case. Broadly speaking, we use a first stage that resembles a non-
adaptive scheme of the type discussed in Chapter 2, and use the second stage
to resolve any remaining uncertainty. We restrict attention here to so-called
conservative two-stage testing, in which the second stage is required to individ-
ually test every item that has not been confirmed as nondefective by appearing
in a negative test in the first stage. The word ‘conservative’ is used as this is
a ‘safety first’ approach that confirms the status of every defective or possibly-
defective item with an individual test – even if an item is logically a ‘definite
defective’ (in the terminology of Section 2.4), or even if a more complicated sec-
ond stage might require fewer tests. (Our use of the term ‘conservative’ follows
[14, 17]; other literature has called this ‘trivial’ two-stage testing, including [219]
studying the sparse regime.)
Aldridge [14] considered conservative two-stage testing in which the first
stage follows the trichotomy we set out in Section 1.3: Bernoulli designs (where
each item is in each test with probabilityp; the optimal value ofpis 1/k=
1/βn), constant tests-per-item designs (where each item is inLtests), and
doubly regular designs (where each item is inLtests and each test containsm
items).
Dorfman’s algorithm corresponds to a doubly regular first stage withL= 1.
A doubly regular design withL= 2 can be pictured by arrangingm 2 items in
anm×mgrid. We perform 2mpooled tests: one for each row and one for
each column, with the entire row or column being the pool. Any item that has
both its row-test and its column-test positive receives an individual test in the
second round. This method was studied in [39, 14].
It turns out that the theory in the linear regime has some significant differ-
ences to that of the sparse regime. One difference is that the optimal choices
128CHAPTER 5. OTHER TOPICS IN GROUP TESTING
ofLandmare constant with respect to the problem size, so the fact that they
have to be integers needs to be taken into account. Generally there is no closed
form expression for the optimal parameters, and the rates achieved may not
be smooth as a function of the prevalenceβ. A second difference is that dou-
bly regular designs become more important in the linear regime. In the sparse
regime, the rates of constant tests-per-item and doubly regular designs are iden-
tical [268], but in the linear regime the doubly regular design outperforms the
constant tests-per-item design.
Aldridge [14] gives three theorems, one for each of the three test designs un-
der discussion here. We focus only on the doubly regular design (first discussed
in [39]), since it is the one that performs best [14, Theorem 4]. Specifically,
the design of the first stage, withLtests per item andmitems per test, is as
follows:
•LettingT 1 be the number of first-stage tests, the test matrix consists of
Lsubmatrices of size T1
L×nstacked vertically;
•Each of theLsubmatrices is drawn uniformly at random from the set of
matrices having column weight exactly 1 and row weight exactlym. (Note
that T1
L = n
m by a double-counting argument.)
The result given is for the combinatorial prior withk∼βn, but we expect
essentially the same behaviour under the i.i.d. model. Moreover, while this result
considers the average-case number of tests, we expect that a concentration of
measure argument could establish matching high-probability behaviour.
Theorem 5.16.Under a doubly regular design in the first stage with a con-
stant numberLof tests per item and a constant numbermof items per test,
conservative two-stage testing yields the following number of tests on average as
n→∞whenk∼βn:
ET∼n
L
m +β+ (1−β)
 
1−(1−β) m−1L

.
In the limitβ→0, with optimal choices ofLandm, this simplifies to
ET∼
βln 1
β
ln 2 n,
corresponding to a rate ofln 2≃0.693.
Figure 5.3 illustrates several of the results we have discussed. The achievable
rates are those of individual testing, Dorfman’s algorithm, and conservative two-
stage testing with a doubly regular first stage. The upper bounds on rate are the
counting boundR≤1 and an upper bound specific to conservative two-stage
testing proved in [14, Theorem 6]. The performance of the doubly regular first
stage is very close to optimal (among conservative two-stage methods) in view
of this bound.
Mutesaet al.[223] studied an adaptive scheme similar to the ones we dis-
cussed in this subsection that ‘usually’ only requires two stages, both of which
are doubly regular. Their theoretical results were backed up with field trials for
Covid testing in Rwanda and South Africa.
5.5. THE LINEAR REGIME129
0 0.1 0.2 0.3 0.4 0.5
0.5
0.6
0.7
0.8
0.9
1
Counting Bound
Individual Testing
Dorfman
Doubly Regular
Conservative GT Converse
Figure 5.3: Rates of conservative two-stage schemes for group testing in the
linear regime. The converse specific to conservative testing can be found in [14,
Theorem 6], and the result for Dorfman’s strategy is given in (5.11).
5.5.3 Adaptive testing
We now turn to adaptive testing. Following Aldridge [13], we consider gener-
alized binary splitting algorithms of the same kind as Hwang [158], which we
described in Section 1.5. Here we consider the following variant.
Algorithm 5.1.The following algorithm finds the defectivity status of every
item in a set. The algorithm depends on a parameterm; we pickm= 2 s to be
a power of 2 here for convenience.
1. Choose a subset ofmitems – say, the firstmitems. Test this set.
(a) If the test is negative, we findm= 2 s nondefective items using 1
test.
(b) If the test is positive, perform binary splitting (Algorithm 1.1); we
find 1 defective item and between 0 andm−1 nondefective items
using 1 + log2m=s+ 1 tests.
Remove all items whose whose status was discovered in this step.
2. Repeat Step 1 until no items remain.
We proceed by discussing the zero-error and small-error settings separately.
Zero-error combinatorial setting
As is natural under the zero-error criterion, we take a worst-case analysis and
assume that we are always unlucky in step 1(b) and find 0 nondefective items.
Thus, in each stage we find either one defective usings+ 1 tests orm= 2 s
nondefectives using one test. This observation readily yields the following result.
130CHAPTER 5. OTHER TOPICS IN GROUP TESTING
0 0.1 0.2 0.3 0.4 0.5
0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1
Counting Bound
Individual Testing
Zero-Error Combinatorial
Small-Error i.i.d.
Figure 5.4: Rates of group testing in the linear regimek∼βn: an achievable
rate of combinatorial zero-error adaptive testing (5.13); an achievable rate of
small-error adaptive testing with an i.i.d. prior (5.16); the rateh(β) of individual
testing, which is the capacity of nonadaptive testing (Theorem 5.15); and the
counting boundC≤1.
Theorem 5.17.In the linear regimek∼βn, under the combinatorial prior,
the above binary splitting algorithm with parametersrecovers the defective set
using at most the following number of tests:
T∼(s+ 1)k+ 1
2s (n−k)∼
 1
2s +

s+ 1− 1
2s

β

n.(5.13)
The number of tests in (5.13) is linear inβfor fixeds, but only piecewise
linear after choosing the optimal value ofsfor eachβ, sincesmust be an
integer. The resulting rate achieved by this algorithm is shown in Figure 5.4.
After converting the piecewise linearTinto a rate, we now observe ‘bumps’
with endpoints at locations where the optimal value ofsin (5.13) changes. We
obtain a rate of at least 0.9 for allβ≤1/2.
Settingm= 2 0 = 1 recovers individual testing, requiringT=ntests. In
addition, settingm= 2 1 = 1, we see that we outperform individual testing
when
1
2 +

1 + 1− 1
2

β <1
which is precisely whenβ <1/3. That individual testing is suboptimal for
β <1/3 was first shown by Hu, Hwang and Wang [155], and was also noted in
[119]. Hu, Hwang and Wang [155] conjecture that this is the best possible, in
the sense that individual testing is optimal forβ≥1/3. The best result in this
direction is by Riccio and Colbourn [234], who show that individual testing is
optimal forβ≥1−log 3 2≈0.369.
5.5. THE LINEAR REGIME131
Small-error i.i.d. setting
By analysing the average-case behaviour of the above binary splitting algorithm,
it can be shown that step 1(b) learns the status ofEitems on average, where
E=
mX
j=1
jβ(1−β) j−1 +m(1−β) m
= 1
β
 
1 +m(1−β) m+1−(m+ 1)(1−β) m
+m(1−β) m,(5.14)
and that the average number of tests used is
F= 1 +
 
1−(1−β) m
s.(5.15)
It is then plausible that the average number of tests isET∼ F
E·n, and it
was proved in [13] that this is indeed the case. Thus far, there is no error
probability, but where the small-error criterion comes into play is in establishing
concentration around the average with high probability; again see [13]. These
results are summarized as follows.
Theorem 5.18.In the linear regimek∼βn, under the i.i.d. prior, the above
binary splitting algorithm recovers the defective set using an average number of
tests given by
ET∼ F
E n,(5.16)
whereEandFare defined in(5.14)–(5.15). Moreover, for anyϵ >0, the
number of tests is at most(1 +ϵ)ETwith probability approaching 1 asn→∞.
The corresponding achievable rate is shown in Figure 5.4, and we see that
this rate is at least 0.95 for allβ≤1/2. Again, the ‘bumps’ come from changing
integer values of the optimal choice ofs.
A similar algorithm is studied in [13], following the work of Zaman and Pip-
penger [296], wheremcan be any integer, not just a power of 2, and an optimal
Huffman code to perform the binary splitting. Under such a Huffman code, a
defective item will be found in either⌊log 2m⌋or⌈log 2m⌉tests. After optimiz-
ing over all integersm, Zaman and Pippenger [296] show that this algorithm is
optimal among a subset of adaptive algorithms callednestedalgorithms.
Again, settingm= 2 0 = 1 recovers individual testing. Settingm= 2 1 = 2
recovers an algorithm of Fischer, Klasner and Wegenera [119], which, as they
note, outperforms individual testing whenβ <β ∗ = (3−
√
5)/2≈0.382. Note
thatH((1−β) 2)> H(1−β) precisely whenβ < β ∗, so intuitivelyβ < β∗ is
the regime where a test of two items is ‘more informative’ than a test of one
item. An additional finding in [119] is that this thresholdβ∗ cannot be improved
further, via a converse result showing that individual testing is optimal under
the i.i.d. prior forβ≥β ∗.
5.5.4 Noisy settings
We now discuss the noisy setting, focusing mainly on the symmetric noise model
in which each test outcome is independently flipped with some probabilityρ∈
(0, 1
2). A notable distinction from the noiseless setting is that testing every
132CHAPTER 5. OTHER TOPICS IN GROUP TESTING
item individually once is insufficient, due to the noise. Nevertheless, we can
consider individual testing as a baseline, where we test each itemmultipletimes.
A straightforward analysis based on concentration inequalities and the union
bound reveals that for this to succeed, we should test each item Θ(logn) times,
for a total of Θ(nlogn) tests. A converse bound due to Scarlett [238] shows
that this scaling is optimal among all designs, even when adaptivity is allowed.
While this means that the usual notion of ‘rate’ is zero, it is still interesting to
answer the following question:What is the optimal coefficient tonlognin the
number of tests, up to lower-order asymptotic terms?
The work of Hintzeet al.[152] completely resolved this question for the
i.i.d. prior under both nonadaptive and adaptive test designs. Their results are
summarized as follows, withβ∈(0,1) again denoting the probability of each
item being defective:
•For nonadaptive designs, the optimal number of tests is
T∼min
m∈Z+
nlnn
−mln
 
1−(1−β) m−1(1−e −d(1/2∥ρ))

, (5.17)
where
d(a∥b) =alog a
b + (1−a) log 1−a
1−b
is the binary relative entropy function.
•For adaptive designs, the optimal number of tests is
T∼ βnlnn
d(ρ∥1−ρ) ,(5.18)
and moreover, this threshold can be attained using a 3-stage algorithm.
An example withρ= 0.11 is shown in Figure 5.5, where we observe that there
is a substantial gap between adaptive and nonadaptive testing. We note that
[152] also handles asymmetric binary noise channels, in which 1→0 flips and
0→1 flips can have different probabilities.
We only provide a few high-level ideas behind the proofs under nonadaptive
testing, and refer the interested reader to [152] for the details. For the adaptive
setting, the achievability part is based on approximate recovery followed by
‘clean-up’ stages, thus bearing conceptual similarity to the techniques outlined
in Section 5.2.
For the nonadaptive converse, the idea is to consider a ‘genie-aided’ estimator
in which each item’s defectivity status is estimated via maximum a priori (MAP)
decodingconditioned on the correct status of all other items. It is shown that
this decoder is at least as good as regular MAP decoding (which is optimal in a
non-genie setting), and thus can be analysed for the purpose of a converse. The
decoder is then shown to fail when there are too few tests by upper bounding
the number ofnon-masked testsof each item, i.e., tests containing the item
but no other defectives. (For that item, all other tests are in fact ignored by
genie-aided MAP.) The quantityd(1/2∥ρ) naturally arises because if itemi
hasg i non-masked tests, its probability of being misclassified turns out to be
roughly e−gid(1/2∥ρ) up to lower-order terms in the exponent.
For the achievability result, a key idea is to emulate genie-aided decoding
using apseudo-geniebased on an initial set ofclognindividual tests per item
5.6. GROUP TESTING WITH PRIOR STATISTICS133
0 0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8 1
0
0.5
1
1.5
2
2.5
Nonadaptive
Adaptive
Figure 5.5: Plot of the constantcsuch that the optimal number of tests is
(cnlogn)(1+o(1)), for nonadaptive and adaptive testing with noise levelρ= 0.1.
for some constantc>0. Ifcis very small then thecnlogncontribution to the
number of tests is minimal, yet this still suffices for the vast majority of the
pseudo-genie’s answers to be correct. We also note that the parametermin
(5.17) represents a component of the test design in which each item is placed in
mtests.
These proof outlines omit a number of other important ideas and subtle
issues, for which we again refer the interested reader to [152].
5.6 Group testing with prior statistics
Throughout the monograph, we have considered prior distributions on the defec-
tive set that are relatively ‘uninformative’ other than indicating that defectivity
is rare. In particular, we have considered the combinatorial prior where every
defective set of sizekis equally likely, and the i.i.d. prior where every item is
defective with the same probabilityq. Under both of these priors, every item
has the same probability of being defective, and there is little or no correlation
between any two items’ defectivity statuses.
Although such properties are natural, they can also be unnecessarily restric-
tive. There are several applications in which it is reasonable to expect more
prior information to be available, such as some items having a higher chance of
defectivity, groups of items exhibiting clustering structure, and so on. In this
section, we outline some studies of such kinds of prior information.
5.6.1 Differing defectivity probabilities
If certain items area priorimore likely to be defective than others, then we
should ideally try to exploit this additional prior information. In the following,
we describe some test designs and results along these lines. We focus on the
setting described in the following definition, which to the best of our knowledge
was first studied in the 1970s in papers such as [129, 159, 224].
134CHAPTER 5. OTHER TOPICS IN GROUP TESTING
Definition 5.1(Prior defectivity model).Each itemihas a (known) prior
probabilityq i ∈[0,1] of being defective, and individual items are defective
independently of one another.
For example, this could model a situation where each individual has a differ-
ent likelihood of infection according to their prior activity, date of vaccination,
and so on. In the following, we assume that all of the values ofq i are known
exactly, though we expect the resulting techniques to work well even when they
are only known approximately.
Under the model in Definition 5.1, the key metrics of success will be expressed
in terms of the overall entropyH n =Pn
i=1h(qi) (where, as before,hdenotes
the standard binary entropy) and the average number of defectives kn =P
iqi.
A similar information-theoretic argument to that used to prove the counting
bound (cf., Theorem 1.1) shows that at leastH n tests are required to ensure
that the success probability tends to one. We will regard thisentropy boundas
the benchmark for the performance of any algorithm.
Recall that for any defectivity model, we writeU= (U 1,...,U n) for a ran-
dom vector which encodes the defectivity status of all the items, withU i being
the indicator function of the event that itemiis defective, as in Definition 1.2.
We make the following definition, which generalizes Definition 1.7 (since in the
combinatorial case we haveH(U) = log 2
 n
k

).
Definition 5.2.Given a random process generating the defectivity vectorU,
andTtests, we define therateto be
rate := H(U)
T .(5.19)
Of course, one may wish to create richer models of defectivity under which
Uis generated. For example, one could imagine individuals represented by
the vertices of some graph, and the probability of defectivity of an item being
affected by the defectivity status of each individual’s graph neighbours, perhaps
according to a Markov process. Some richer models along these lines will be
discussed in Section 5.6.2.
We briefly describe the contributions of two specific papers here. In each
case, the key idea is that, by grouping items with a similar value ofq i together,
we can reduce the problem to one which behaves ‘locally approximately’ like the
standard i.i.d. prior. As described in more detail below, splitting strategies are
adopted based on binary trees that are balanced (with roughly equal probability
on each branch to maximize the information gained from each test). These trees
can be understood in analogy with Huffman codes, which are known to achieve
optimal lossless data compression (see for example [142]).
Adaptive testing
Kealy, Johnson and Piechocki [180] give a Hwang-type binary splitting algorithm
(see Section 1.5) in the adaptive case, building on an earlier work of Liet
al.[189] who developed theLaminar algorithmfor the prior defectivity model
(Definition 5.1). They discard very low probability items (which are unlikely
to be defective anyway, so can be assumed nondefective without wasting tests).
The remaining items are grouped together to form a collection of search sets
Sj that contain items with max l,m∈Sjql/qm≤Γ (for some Γ), and with total
5.6. GROUP TESTING WITH PRIOR STATISTICS135
probabilityP
i∈Sjqi≥1/2 wherever possible. Then, one can perform binary
splitting over each of these search setsS j one by one.
Using this approach, [180, Theorem 3.9] gives a technical condition onq i
under which a rate of 1 (in the sense of Definition 5.2) is achievable in a regime
wherekn/Hn→0. In other words, roughlyH n tests suffice to make the success
probability tend to one. This algorithm can be viewed as a non-identical version
of Hwang’s generalized binary splitting algorithm [158], and this result is a non-
identical version of Theorem 1.3.
The techniques outlined above are primarily targeted at the sublinear spar-
sity regimekn =o(n), but we briefly note that linear sparsity was considered by
Attia, Chang, and Tandon [27]. Their work adopts the approach of conservative
two-stage group testing (see Section 5.5.2) while allowing heterogeneity in the
defectivity status of the items.
Nonadaptive testing
In the nonadaptive setting, relatively less is known. As a baseline for the per-
formance, we point out that if the number of defectives behaves as kn(1 +o(1))
with probability approaching one (as we should usually expect for growing kn
due to concentration), then the sufficient number of tests proved for various
algorithms in Chapter 2 (e.g., COMP and DD) remain valid. This is because
the analysis of these algorithms was based on fixing a defective set of cardinal-
itykand bounding the probability with respect to the randomness in the test
design. Hence, other than the slight modification ofktok(1 +o(1)) (which was
discussed previously in Remark 2.3), the non-uniform prior does not impact the
analysis. It should be noted, however, that using the same number of tests as
the uniform setting does not amount to achieving the same rate; the rate can
be much smaller for a given number of tests whenH(U)≪klog 2
n
k .
Nonadaptive test designs that introduce block structure into the test ma-
trix were explored in [189]. The performance guarantee given for this ap-
proach does not quite amount to a positive rate, as the scaling achieved is
T=O(H(U) logn+ kn) rather thanT=O(H(U)), but it is only off by a
logarithmic factor under the mild assumptionH(U) = Ω( kn). We refer the
interested reader to [189] for further details, and instead focus our attention on
providing evidence towards designs that achieve a positive rate, or even a rate
of one.
To do so, we consider a simplified setting in which the items are arranged
into disjoint groupsG 1,...,G m whose union equals{1,...,n}. Suppose that
groupjcontainsn j items, each of which is defective with probability kj/nj,
with kj denoting the average number of defectives in the group (in contrast
with the above, the dependence onnis left implicit). Motivated by the idea of
using block designs [189], we can consider a simple approach in which we apply
a standard group testing algorithm on each group of items separately.
Specifically, for groupj, we fix a number of testsT j and form aT j×n j
i.i.d. Bernoulli test matrix in which each entry is positive with probabilityν/ kj,
for someν >0. We can study each such group using the techniques of the
previous chapters, apply a union bound over themgroups to deduce an overall
upper bound on the error probability, and note that the total number of tests
isT= Pm
j=1Tj.
For instance, putting aside computational considerations, suppose that we
136CHAPTER 5. OTHER TOPICS IN GROUP TESTING
use the SSS decoding algorithm that achieves a rate of one (in the standard
setting) whenk=O(n 0.409) (cf., Section 4.4). To simplify the analysis, we
make the following assumptions:
•Bothn j → ∞and kj → ∞asn→ ∞, with kj =O(n 0.409
j ). These
assumptions readily yield that groupjcontains kj(1 +o(1)) defectives
with probability approaching one.
•The number of groups is bounded (m=O(1)), so if the error probability
for each group vanishes, then so does the overall error probability.
By these assumptions and the fact that SSS achieves a rate of one whenk=
O(n0.409) under the near-constant column weight design, one can achieve van-
ishing error probability with a number of tests satisfying
T= (1 +o(1))
mX
j=1
kj log2
nj
kj
.
We claim that this in fact corresponds to a rate of one in the non-uniform prior
defectivity model. To see this, note that
H(U) =
mX
j=1
njh
kj
nj

= (1 +o(1))
mX
j=1
kj log2
nj
kj
,
where we have usedh(α) = (−αlog 2α)(1 +o(1)) asα→0.
It remains an interesting direction for future research to generalize the above
approach to general values of (q 1,...,q n) and understand what rates can be
achieved, both information-theoretically and with practical decoding techniques.
5.6.2 Community structure
While the setting of differing defectivity probabilities provides a number of inter-
esting insights beyond the standard priors, it is still restricted by the assumption
that the status of every item is independent of all others. In this section, we
consider priors that capturecorrelationsbetween items; for example, due to
defectives clustering together or otherwise influencing each other. We first give
a brief overview of a number of perspectives that have been explored, and then
provide the details on one specific model.
Overview of the literature
A line of early works explored group testing withconsecutive defectives[80, 171],
in which the items are labelled as{1,2,...,n}, and the defective set is of the
form{i∗,i∗ + 1,...,i ∗ +k−1}for somei ∗. For example, such a scenario might
be encountered in applications where the items are manufactured in sequence
and the manufacturing process becomes faulty for a period of time. See also
[47] for an extension to multiple blocks of defectives.
Following the use of group testing during the Covid-19 pandemic [17], a
variety of settings were proposed seeking to capture prior knowledge that may
be available in medical applications. For example, Nikolopouloset al.[226]
proposedcommunity-aware group testingthat seeks to exploit knowledge of
5.6. GROUP TESTING WITH PRIOR STATISTICS137
which individuals share a household, share an office, and so on, and Goenkaet
al.[141] and Caoet al.[51] studied dynamic models based on contact tracing.
Graph-based models have been particularly prevalent [5, 174, 186, 21], inspired
by similar considerations.
Another line of works, more on the theoretical side, has sought to let the
prior knowledge be very general by assuming that the defective set lies in some
strict subset of the
 n
k

possibilities; see [143] for the zero-error criterion and
[186, 227] for the small-error criterion.
Since there are too many works to summarize in detail, we will focus our
attention on community structure [226], which we believe to be representative of
the general topic and well-aligned with the other parts of this monograph. Since
their setup and terminology are strongly geared towards medical testing, we will
momentarily let ‘individual’ be synonymous with ‘item’, and let ‘infected’ be
synonymous with ‘defective’.
Community-aware group testing
The setup in [226] is fairly general, allowing communities to overlap with each
other, to have different sizes, and to each have a different prevalence of infection.
To simplify the exposition, we focus our attention here on the special case of
non-overlapping communities having equal size, equal probability of containing
infections, and equal intra-community infection probabilities.
The items are assumed to be arranged in known groups calledcommunities
(where each ‘community’ might represent a family, a household, an office, or any
group with close contact). The number of communities (or families) is denoted
byF, and each community hasMmembers, so the total number of individuals
isn=FM. The infection model is as follows:
•Under the combinatorial prior, there are exactlyk f infected communities,
each having exactlyk m infected members, and the infected (defective)
set is uniformly random over all choices satisfying these conditions. All
members of noninfected communities are themselves noninfected.
•Under the probabilistic prior, each community is considered to be infected
independently with probabilityq f, and conditioned on the community be-
ing infected, each of its members is infected independently with probability
qm. All members of noninfected communities are themselves noninfected.
These models are related viak f≃q fFandk m≃q mM, assuming thatFand
Mare large enough to observe concentration around the averages.
With these models in place, one can readily extend the counting bound in
the combinatorial case, and apply an entropy bound in the probabilistic case.
We focus on the former, since it is relatively easier to understand and interpret.
Theorem 5.19.Under the setup of community-aware group testing with the
combinatorial model described above, with parameters(F,M,k f,km), in order
to attain asymptotically vanishing error probability asn→∞, it must be the
case that
T≥(1−η)

log2
F
kf

+kf log2
M
km

,
whereη >0is arbitrarily small.
138CHAPTER 5. OTHER TOPICS IN GROUP TESTING
It is instructive to compare this with the counting bound of log 2
 n
k

with
k=k fkm, although it should be kept in mind that comparing two lower bounds
is not conclusive. (See below for an upper bound.) To simplify matters, suppose
thatk≪nandk f≪F, so that the comparison is essentially betweenklog 2
n
k
andk f log2
F
kf
+kf log2
 M
km

. We can then consider various cases of interest:
•Ifk m≪M, then the termk f log2
 M
km

roughly simplifies toklog 2
M
km
, so
the main difference is in having log 2
M
km
in place of log 2
n
k .
•In the extreme case thatk m =M(entire communities always get infected
together), we are only left withkf log2
F
kf
, which amounts to a considerable
reduction in the leading term fromk=k fkm to onlyk f.
•In the arguably more realistic case ofk m =M/2, the termk f log2
 M
km

asymptotically simplifies tok fM= 2k fkm = 2k, meaning the main re-
duction is in the the removal of the logarithmic factor log 2
n
k .
Accordingly, we see that the potential reductions are usually in the logarithmic
terms, except in extreme scenarios. However, such reductions can still be quite
significant, and this is supported experimentally in [226].
On the algorithmic side, both adaptive and nonadaptive algorithms were
proposed in [226], but we focus here only on the adaptive case, which is easier
to describe and gives a result that can readily be compared with the lower
bound. For clarity, we first focus on a simplified version of their algorithm that
is suited to certain specific settings, and then discuss generalizations that can
better handle other settings. The simplified algorithm is described as follows:
(i) We first form tests in which entire communities are placed into tests.
Specifically, we consider theFcommunities as ‘super-items’ and run a
regular group testing strategy designed forF‘items’ andk f ‘defectives’,
where placing a super-item in a test means placing all of its community
members.
(ii) For each community that is declared infected in step (i), we test each of
its members individually.
Note that step (ii) relies on the results from step (i), meaning that this approach
is inherently adaptive with at least two stages. In the fully adaptive case,
the standard group testing subroutine can be chosen as Hwang’s generalized
binary splitting (see Section 1.5), which incursk f
 
log2
F
kf
+ 1

tests in step (i).
Combining this withk fMindividual tests in step (ii), we obtain the following.
Theorem 5.20.Under the setup of community-aware group testing with the
combinatorial model described above, with parameters(F,M,k f,km), the adap-
tive algorithm described above has zero error probability and uses an average
number of tests upper bounded as follows:
ET≤k f

log2
F
kf
+M+ 1

.
We observe that this upper bound asymptotically matches the lower bound
whenk f≪F,k m =M/2, andM≫1, since some simple asymptotic analysis
5.7. EXPLICIT CONSTRUCTIONS139
yields
log2
F
kf

+kf log2
M
km

=

kf log2
F
kf
+kfM

(1 +o(1)).
More generally, the algorithm that we have described is primarily suited to
settings where infected communities have an infection rate high enough that
individual testing with a community found to be infected is warranted. If,
on the other hand, individual infections are still rare even within an infected
community (i.e.,k m≪M), then thek fMterm in the upper bound may be
highly suboptimal (just as usingnindividual tests is highly suboptimal in the
standard sparse setting). In such cases, a natural improvement is to use group
testing in step (ii) as well – assuming thek f infected communities are success-
fully found, one can merge all their members to formk fMindividuals, among
whichk fkm are infected. We can then apply standard group testing techniques
to these individuals, and a suitable generalization of Theorem 5.20 can readily
be obtained.
The situation becomes more complicated when different infected commu-
nities have different numbers of infected members. This can happen due to
fluctuations under the probabilistic prior, and more significantly, it arises when
we generalize beyond the ‘symmetric’ special case that we are focusing on. To
handle such scenarios, the main algorithm of [226] adopts some additional ideas:
•Instead of always testing each entire community together, they propose
to randomly taker‘representatives’ from each community for use in step
(i), ignoring any non-representative members initially.
•If the analogue of step (i) above declares that some community’s set of
representatives is infected, then the community is declared ‘heavily in-
fected’, and its members are tested individually in the same way as step
(ii) above.
•Even if a given community is not found to be heavily infected, the pos-
sibility is still left open that some infections are present in the non-
representative members. Accordingly, in an additional step (iii), further
testing is performed on all individuals that were not tested individually.
Since such infections will be rare, a standard group testing algorithm is
applied on these, with suitably-chosen parameters.
We refer the reader to [226] for a more detailed description, along with
significantly more general results than the ones we presented here (including
for probabilistic priors, varying infection rates between communities, and over-
lapping communities), and further comparisons between their upper and lower
bounds.
5.7 Explicit constructions
Throughout the monograph, we have focused on randomized test designs, in
particularly Bernoulli designs and near-constant column weight designs. The
sublinear-time algorithms described in Section 5.4 also use randomization in
the design stage. The understanding of explicit deterministic constructions, by
140CHAPTER 5. OTHER TOPICS IN GROUP TESTING
c1c2 cn. . . .
000
10...
00
00
0000
00
00...
00
00
1
1
000
10
1
1
. . . .
0
00
0...
0
0
00
00
00
1
1
1
n
eT T=eT 
Figure 5.6: (Left) The codewords{c 1,...,c n}of a length- eTnon-binary code of
sizenare arranged to form a eT×nnon-binary matrix, with each symbol taking
one ofλvalues. (Right) Each non-binary symbol of the matrix on the left is
replaced by a length-λbinary string with a 1 in the entry indexing the value
(out ofλpossibilities) of the corresponding non-binary symbol.
contrast, remains relatively limited when it comes to the small-error recovery
criterion. In this section, we give an overview of some progress in this direction.
For the zero-error recovery criterion, several explicit constructions have been
proposed. A prominent early construction, to be described below, was provided
by Kautz and Singleton [179], and achieves zero-error reconstruction in the
noiseless setting withT=O
 
k2 log2n
log2k

tests. A related but more recent con-
struction due to Porat and Rothschild [231] achievesT=O
 
k2 logn

. Of course,
these results are not sufficient for achieving a positive rate whenk= Θ(n α) for
someα∈(0,1). The interested reader is referred to [231] for more detailed
overview of deterministic constructions in the zero-error setting, and to [63] for
an overview of alternative approaches based on derandomization.
Interestingly, recent developments on achieving a positive rate under the
small-error criterion have made use of very similar constructions. In particular,
the construction of Kautz and Singleton [179] turns out to be suitable for the
small-error criterion when its parameters are suitably modified. This construc-
tion is based on the idea of concatenated codes, depicted in Figure 5.6. The
construction starts with a non-binary channel codeC={c 1,...,c n}containing
ncodewords of length eT, with symbols taking one ofλvalues. As shown in the
left of the figure, these codewords are arranged in columns to form a eT×nma-
trix. To construct the final group testing matrix, each code symbol is replaced
by a length-λbinary vector with a one in the entry indexing the corresponding
non-binary code-symbol and zeros elsewhere. This produces a constant column
weight design, where each of thenitems is in exactly eTof theT= eTλtests.
If the original codewords are sufficiently well-separated, then different defective
sets should lead to different test outcomes.
For zero-error group testing, the performance of this construction depends
crucially on the minimum distance of the codeC. In contrast, Mazumdar [215]
related the (nonzero) error probability of the construction to both the minimum
5.8. CONSTRAINED GROUP TESTING141
Reference # Tests Zero-error?
Kautz-Singleton [179]O
 
k2 log2n
log2k

yes
Porat-Rothschild [231]O(k 2 logn) yes
Mazumdar [215]O
 
k log2n
logk

no
Inanet al.[163]O(klogn) no
Table 5.5: Summary of the number of tests required for explicit group testing
designs, in the zero-error and small-error settings. The result in [163] addition-
ally assumes thatk= Ω(log 2n).
distance and the average distance. This led to vanishing error probability with
a number of tests of the formT=O
 
k log2n
logk

using either of the following two
non-binary codes: (i) the above-mentioned construction of Porat and Rothschild
[231], which achieves the Gilbert-Varshamov bound; (ii) a construction based
on algebraic-geometric codes due to Tsfasman, Vl˘ adut, and Zink [274]. The
behaviourT=O
 
k log2n
logk

leads to a positive rate wheneverk= Θ(n α) for some
α∈(0,1), but the rate vanishes asα→0.
The original construction of Kautz and Singleton [179] used a Reed–Solomon
code with eT=λ−1 andn=λ k. In a recent work, Inanet al.[163] studied a
similar construction with Reed-Solomon codes, but proposed different parame-
ters, choosing eT= Θ(logn) while still usingn=λ k. They performed a direct
analysis without relying on distance properties, and showed that one can achieve
vanishing error probability withT=O(klogn) tests as long ask= Ω(log 2n).
As a result, a positive rate is achieved even in the limitα→0.
Both [215] and [163] obtained the preceding results using COMP decod-
ing (under a different name). In addition, in [163] the same construction was
combined with the NCOMP algorithm (see Section 3.4) to obtain the same
T=O(klogn) scaling under the symmetric noise model. A follow-up work
by Inan and Ozgur [164] additionally showed that the approach of [163] (with
modified parameters) can be combined with bit-mixing coding [37] to attain an
explicit design that succeeds withO(klogn) tests and has sublinear decoding
time (cf.Section 5.4), namelyO(k 3 logk+klogn).
While these results provide important contributions in understanding ex-
plicit constructions under the small-error criterion, their focus is on the scaling
laws rather than the constant factors or the rates achieved. It remains an impor-
tant open challenge to develop achievable rates for explicit constructions that
can compete with those of randomized constructions.
The preceding results are summarized in Table 5.5.
5.8 Constrained group testing
Thus far, we have assumed that any given group test can contain an arbitrary set
of items. However, in several practical applications, the tests are in fact subject
to certain constraints that may make standard designs (e.g., i.i.d. Bernoulli)
infeasible. In this section, we give an overview of several such constraints and
how they are motivated by particular applications of interest.
142CHAPTER 5. OTHER TOPICS IN GROUP TESTING
5.8.1 Path constraints on a graph
The work of Cheraghchiet al.[66] considers a model in which items may cor-
respond to either nodes or edges in a graph (but not both), and the only tests
allowed are those that correspond to a path on that graph. One of the main
motivating applications for this scenario is the problem of network tomography
(mentioned previously in Section 1.7), in which the nodes correspond to ma-
chines and the edges correspond to connections between machines. The goal is
to identify faults in the network, and this is done by checking whether a packet
sent from one machine successfully arrived at a target machine. There are at
least two interesting variants of this setup:
•If the goal is to find faulty connections between machines, then one can
consider the edges as corresponding to items, and each test as correspond-
ing to sending a packet between two machines along a specific path and
checking whether it arrived successfully. Hence, each test is constrained
to be the set of edges along some path in the graph.
•If the goal is to find faulty machines, then one can consider the nodes as
corresponding to items, and a test again corresponds to sending a packet
between two machines along a specific path and checking whether it ar-
rived successfully. Hence, each test is constrained to be the set of nodes
along some path in the graph.
The second of these generalizes an earlier model corresponding to the special
case of a line graph [71].
For both of the above models, random testing designs are constructed in
[66] by performing arandom walkon the graph, thus ensuring that the path
constraint is not violated. It was shown that theO(k 2 logn) achievability result
for zero-error group testing can be generalized toO(k2τ(n) 2 logn), whereτ(n)≥
1 is a property of the graph known as the mixing time, defined formally in this
context in [66, Definition 6]. For many graphs,τ(n) is small (e.g., constant or
logarithmic inn). For example, [66, Section V] discusses the fact that for
expander graphs with a constant spectral gap, and for certain Erd˝ os-R´ enyi
random graphs,τ(n) =O(logn) (with high probability). This means that
for graphs of this kind, the additional constraints do not considerably increase
the required number of tests in the zero-error setting.
To our knowledge, these constraints have not been studied in the small-error
setting, which is the main focus of this monograph. This poses a potentially
interesting direction for future research.
5.8.2 Edge constraints on a graph
A series of works rooted in early studies in theoretical computer science (e.g.,
see [6, 7]) have considered a different type of constraint imposed by a graph
G= (V,E). Here, the edges correspond to items, andkof the|E|items are
defective. However, each test is a group ofnodesrather than edges, and the test
outcome is positive if and only if there is at least one defective edge connecting
two different nodes in the group. An interesting special case of this problem is
obtained whenEis the complete graph, and the goal is to identify a subgraph
ofkedges corresponding to those that are defective.
5.8. CONSTRAINED GROUP TESTING143
As an example application, this might correspond to a scenario where we
wish to identify interactions between chemicals, and each test amounts to com-
bining a number of chemicals and observing whether any reaction occurs.
The work of [168] considers the adaptive setting, and shows that even in the
general formulation, it suffices to haveklog 2
|E|
k +O(k) tests, which matches
(a slight variation of) the counting bound asymptotically wheneverk=o(|E|).
More recently, significant effort has been put into developing algorithms with
limited stages of adaptivity. We refer the reader to [1] and the references therein
for further details, and highlight a particularly interesting result: In the special
case thatEis the complete graph, it is known that whenkgrows sufficiently
slowly compared to|V|, 2 any nonadaptive algorithm requires Ω(k2 log|V|) tests
even when a small probability of error is tolerated. This is in stark contrast with
standard group testing, wherek 2 terms only arise under the zero-error criterion
(see Section 1.6). On the other hand, it was shown in [194] thatO(klog|V|)
nonadaptive tests indeed suffice in the small-error setting for certainrandom
(rather than worst-case) graphs with an average ofkedges. See also [28] for an
extension to an analogous hypergraph learning problem.
5.8.3 Sparse designs
Another interesting form of constrained group testing is that in which the num-
ber of tests-per-item or items-per-test is limited. Using the terminology of
Gandikotaet al.[126], we consider the following:
•The constraint ofγ-divisibilityrequires that each item participates in at
mostγtests. If one considers the classical application of testing blood for
diseases, this corresponds to the case that each patient’s blood sample can
only be split into a limited number of smaller subsamples.
•The constraint ofρ-sized testsrequires that any given test contains at
mostρitems. This may correspond to equipment limitations that prevent
arbitrarily many items from being included in a pool.
As noted in [126], the most interesting cases are the regimesγ=o(logn)
andρ=o
 n
k

; this is because if one allowsγ=O(logn) orρ=O
 n
k

and
the implied constants are not too small, then even standard designs (such as
constant column weight designs) can be used that are already near-optimal in
the unconstrained sense.
We proceed to briefly outline some of the main existing results. Under the
γ-divisibility constraint withγ=o(logn), we have the following:
•A simple adaptive algorithm attains zero error probability usingγk(n/k) 1/γ
tests (this was also noted in an early work of Li [188]). The algorithm is
a ‘γ-stage’ algorithm in the sense of Section 5.2, and is defined recur-
sively. The caseγ= 1 uses individual testing. Then the algorithm for
γ-divisibility is as follows: Partition thenitems intoA=k(n/k) 1/γ sets
of sizen/A, and test each set. As usual, all items in negative tests are
nondefective. For the remaining items – of which there are at mostkn/A
– continue with the algorithm for (γ−1)-divisibility. The first step takes
2This is a more stringent requirement than it may seem, since there are
 |V|
2

≈ 1
2|V| 2
items in total.
144CHAPTER 5. OTHER TOPICS IN GROUP TESTING
k(n/k)1/γ tests, and the worst-case number of tests in each subsequent
step is easily checked to also bek(n/k) 1/γ, giving the desired result. The
caseγ= 2 gives Dorfman’s original adaptive algorithm [96] (see (1.13) in
Chapter 1).
•For nonadaptive testing and the small-error criterion, Gandikotaet al.
[126] show that any algorithm requires roughlyγk(n/k) 1/γ tests. In ad-
dition, they show that one can attain error probability at mostϵusing at
most eγk(n/ϵ)1/γ tests, which behaves similarly to the converse bound but
nevertheless leaves a gap in the scaling laws. The corresponding algorithm
and test design are discussed below.
•Improved results were obtained by Gebhardet al.[132], giving a lower
bound on the number of tests of max

e−1γk
 n
k
1/γ
,γk 1+1/γ	
and an
upper bound of max

γk
 n
k
1/γ
,γk 1+1/γ	
, up to lower-order asymptotic
terms. Together, these results establish an exact threshold in sufficiently
dense regimes, and a threshold tight to within a factor of e −1 more gen-
erally.
Under theρ-sized tests constraint withρ= Θ
 
(n/k)β
for someβ∈[0,1) and
in the sparse regimek= Θ(n α),α<1, we have the following results:
•Any testing strategy requires at leastn/ρtests, as this many tests is
required just to test each item once. Applying the generalized binary
splitting algorithm (see Sections 1.5 and 5.5) starting with sets of sizeρ
requires n
ρ +klog 2ρ+O(k)∼ n
ρ tests, wheren/ρis for testing each set
once andklog 2ρ+O(k) is forkrounds of binary splitting.
•For nonadaptive testing under the small-error criterion, Gandikotaet al.
[126] show that any algorithm requires roughly 1
1−β
n
ρ tests. In addition,
they show that vanishing error probability can be attained using roughly
1
(1−β)(1−α)
n
ρ tests.
•Improved results were obtained by Gebhardet al.[132] in the special case
thatρ=O(1) (soβ= 0), leading to a precise threshold of
max

1 +
j α
1−α
kn
ρ, 2n
ρ+ 1

up to lower-order asymptotic terms. Analogous improvements were also
derived by Tan, Tan, and Scarlett [268] for the case thatβ >0, but
without establishing exact thresholds.
We observe that under both types of constraint, the number of tests required
is significantly higher than the usualO(klogn) scaling.
The lower bounds of Gandikotaet al.[126] are based on Fano’s inequality,
but with more careful entropy bounds than the standard approach of upper
bounding the entropy of a test outcome by 1. For instance, if each test contains
at mostρ=o(n/k) items, then the probability of the test being positive tends
to zero, so the entropy per test is much smaller than one bit. The upper bounds
of [126] are based on test designs with exactlyγtests per item or exactlyρ
items per test, along with the use of the basic COMP algorithm.
5.9. COMPUTATIONAL CONSIDERATIONS145
The improved lower bounds in [132, 268] are based on identifying suitable
maskingevents, in analogy with the developments outlined in Section 4.5.1.
The improved upper bounds in [132, 268] are based on improving both the
test design and the choice of decoder. Under theγ-divisibility constraint, the
near-constant tests-per-item design and DD algorithm are the key ingredients,
similarly to the unconstrained setting. Under theρ-sized tests constraint, the
design choices are somewhat more delicate: in [268] a doubly-regular test design
is paired with the DD algorithm, whereas in [132] a ‘nearly regular’ test design
based on random graph matching is paired with the SCOMP algorithm.
We briefly mention that a complementary constrained group testing problem
has also been considered, in which the number of positive tests (rather than
items-per-test or tests-per-item) is constrained [87].
5.9 Computational considerations
In Chapter 4, we surveyed a series of works resulting in a precise understanding
of what rates are achievable for noiseless nonadaptive group testing: When
k= Θ(n α), the best possible rate is RNCC = min

1,(ln 2) 1−α
α
	
. We saw that
this rate can be achieved by various test designs and decoders depending onα:
•Forα≥ 1
2, it suffices to pair the DD algorithm with the near-constant
column weight design;
•Forα< 1
2, the near-constant column weight design can still be used, but
the decoder adopted in the analysis involves a computationally intractable
brute force search;
•For allα∈(0,1), the same rate can be achieved with polynomial-time
decoding when a spatially coupled test design is used.
The findings are similar for the Bernoulli design, albeit with a slightly smaller
rate for medium to large values ofα. A similar discussion also holds for approx-
imate recovery (cf., Section 5.1):
•The optimal rate is 1 for allα∈(0,1):
•Under both the Bernoulli and near-constant column weight designs, this
optimal rate can be achieved, but the decoder used is computationally
intractable, and the best known practical methods only attain a smaller
rate of at most ln 2≈0.693;
•Under the spatially coupled test design, the optimal rate can be achieved
with polynomial-time decoding.
In view of this discussion, the following question naturally arises:Is there a com-
putationally efficient decoder that achieves the information-theoretically optimal
rates (for exact recovery withα < 1
2 or approximate recovery withα∈(0,1))
under the Bernoulli design and/or the near-constant column weight design, with-
out incorporating spatial coupling?In this section, we survey various works that
addressed this question, with an emphasis on certain kinds ofcomputational
hardnessresults. These works focused on approximate recovery (see Section
5.1) witho(k) mistakes, but it is worth noting that any converse bound on the
rate for this criterion implies the same converse for exact recovery.
146CHAPTER 5. OTHER TOPICS IN GROUP TESTING
Evidence from local search algorithms
The works of Iliopoulos and Zadik [160] and Lovig and Zadik [200] focused
on Bernoulli testing under the approximate recovery criterion, and studied the
performance oflocal search algorithmsthat seek to gradually improve the es-
timate via iterative improvements until some stopping condition is met. Both
works particularly emphasized Monte Carlo methods, which we briefly outlined
in Section 3.3.1.
While the initial evidence in [160] pointed to the possibility of the optimal
information-theoretic threshold being attainable via local search algorithms,
the follow-up work in [200] gave stronger evidence in the opposite direction,
suggesting that local search algorithmscannotattain a rate exceeding ln 2. To
describe the results of these works in more detail, we first need to outline a
property known as theoverlap gap [roperty(OGP).
In the context of group testing, the Overlap Gap Property (OGP) is related
to the following problem: Letting PD be the set of possibly defective items
(items not appearing in any negative tests), the goal is to find a size-kset
ˆK⊆PD that minimizes the number of unexplained positive tests (the number
of tests that are positive but do not contain any items from ˆK). Informally,
the OGP states that the set of near-optimal solutions to this problem forms
two distinct clusters; one ‘close’ to the true defective setKand another ‘far’
fromK. When this is the case, algorithms based on local improvements may
get stuck in the ‘far’ cluster and fail to bridge the gap. Conversely, as discussed
in [200], local search algorithms have been observed to succeed in the absence
of an OGP in several other contexts (for example, sparse linear regression and
planted clique problems).
Lettingϕ(ℓ) denote the smallest number of unexplained tests over all size-k
subsets of PD containingℓdefectives, one of the main results in [160] showed
that the average-case behaviour ofϕ(ℓ) is non-decreasing, which suggests the
absenceof the OGP. However, a refined analysis in [200] revealed that the
average-case evidence is in fact misleading, and arises due to the average being
heavily influenced by rare events. With a more careful analysis that conditions
away such events (namely, events in which certain items appear in ‘unusually
many’ tests), it was found that the OGP in fact holds for sufficiently smallα
when the rate is below a threshold of roughly 0.678. As a corollary of this,
a certain class of ‘low-temperature’ Markov Chain Monte Carlo methods is
shown to fail at such rates; the proof uses connections to a random set cover
problem (see our Remark 2.1). The rate of 0.678 is in fact even lower than that
of separate decoding of items (ln 2≈0.693), suggesting that the local search
algorithms under consideration are strictly suboptimal, even among polynomial-
time methods.
It is worth noting, however, that these results are asymptotic in nature,
and may not align with empirical findings at small or moderate problem sizes.
In fact, numerical simulations were performed in [160] demonstrating that a
local search algorithm based on Glauber dynamics can match the performance
of the optimal Smallest Satisfying Set (SSS) algorithm at practical problem
sizes. Thus, despite the above theoretical findings, local search methods may
still significantly outperform simpler methods such as COMP, DD, and separate
decoding of items in practice.
5.9. COMPUTATIONAL CONSIDERATIONS147
Evidence from low-degree polynomial algorithms
The work of Coja-Oghlanet al.[77] seeks to understand the approximate recov-
ery criterion using an indirect approach that first studies adetection problem
(see also [273]): Given a test matrixXand vector of test resultsy, determine
whetherXandywere produced via the standard noiseless group testing model
(under the combinatorial prior onK) or were produced independently of one
another (with a suitably defined ‘null distribution’). It is shown in [77] that this
is an easier problem than achieving approximate recovery (witho(k) mistakes)
in group testing, meaning that if the detection problem is impossible then so is
the approximate recovery problem.
The class of algorithms considered in [77] is that oflow-degree polynomial al-
gorithms: Consider the bipartite graph (see Figure 3.1 in Section 3.3) described
bynTbinary values (1 for an edge, 0 otherwise); apply a degree-Dpolynomial
f:R nT→Rto that graph (for someD>0); and make the final detection deci-
sion based on the resulting output. LettingPandQbeing the two distributions
in the detection problem, a natural goal is to have the averagesEP [f] andE Q[f]
be separated by at least a constant factor times one standard deviation; since,
if this fails, distinguishing the two may be hard or impossible. This condition
is known asweak separation.
Informally, a degree-Dpolynomial algorithm is expected to have runtime
exponential inDin the worst case, meaning that if we seek runtime polynomial
inn, we should targetD=O(logn). While the class of low-degree polynomial
algorithms is not exhaustive, it captures powerful techniques such as spectral
methods, as well as other methods providing state-of-the-art guarantees in prob-
lems such as planted clique and community detection. There are also results
showing that their failure implies the failure of another prominent class (namely,
statistical query algorithms) under suitable assumptions [38].
With the above discussion in mind, two of the main results in [77] are out-
lined as follows. As ever,αis the sparsity parameter such thatk= Θ(n α).
•For the constant column weight design, it is shown that ifT=cklog 2
n
k
withc< 1
ln 2
 
1− α
2(1−α)

, then for someD=n Ω(1), all degree-Dpolyno-
mial algorithms fail to obtain weak separation. This suggests a required
runtime for weak detection of exp(n Ω(1)), i.e., higher than polynomial.
Asα→0 the threshold oncapproaches 1
ln 2, corresponding to a rate
of ln 2≈0.693, which matches that of COMP. This suggests that it is
computationally hard to attain a better rate than COMP for smallα.
•Analogous results are given for the Bernoulli design; these are more com-
plicated to state, but they similarly suggest that in low-αregimes there
exist rates that are information-theoretically achievable but computation-
ally hard to achieve. In particular, asα→0 their results again suggest
the hardness of beating the rate ln 2≈0.693, which matches the rate of
separate decoding of items.
Discussion
Overall, while [160] and [77] presented opposing evidence, the follow-up work in
[160] led to a more general agreement of evidence pointing to a computational-
statistical gap, at least for small values ofα. Both local methods and low-degree
148CHAPTER 5. OTHER TOPICS IN GROUP TESTING
polynomial methods are generally very powerful and are known to attain optimal
thresholds in other contexts, but it is worth noting that neither of them serve
as ‘exhaustive’ models for computation, so it is still conceivable that they could
be outperformed by other methods.
5.10 Other group testing models
Throughout the monograph, we have focused primarily on the noiseless model
and certain simple random noise models such as symmetric noise, addition noise,
and dilution noise. There are extensive additional models that have been consid-
ered previously in the literature, but in most cases, understanding them via the
information-theoretic viewpoint remains open. Here, we provide an overview of
two models whose study has been more aligned with the techniques surveyed in
this monograph, before providing a partial list of other models.
5.10.1 Quantitative group testing
Under thequantitative group testing model(also known as thelinear modelor
theadder channel model), each test output provides thenumber of defectives
in the test, thus providing significantly more information than the presence or
absence of at least one defective. Quantitative group testing is also equivalent to
acoin-weighing problemdating back to early work including that of Erd¨ os and
R´ enyi [110]; see [40] for a partial historical overview. Yet another interesting
connection is that quantitative group testing can be viewed as a problem of
compressive sensing, i.e., sparse recovery from linear measurements [120], but
with the notable feature that both the sparse vector and measurement matrix
are binary-valued.
Compared to standard group testing, the optimal number of (noiseless) tests
in quantitative group testing turns out to reduce fromO
 
klog n
k

toO
 
k log n
k
logk

(e.g., see [248, 40, 287, 244, 131]). Intuitively, this is because each test outcome
is in{0,1,...,k}, so can reveal up toO(logk) bits of information rather than
only 1 bit. In particular, in the sparse regime (k= Θ(n α) forα∈(0,1)), this
means that the optimal number of tests isO(k).
In the following, until stated otherwise, our discussion is specific to the
sparse regime, noiseless testing, and nonadaptive test designs. In this setting, in
addition to knowing the optimalO(k) scaling, we have a precise understanding
of the constant factor: The optimal number of tests is given by
  2k
logk log n
k

(1 +
o(1)). This result comes from combining converse bounds of Djackov [95] and
Lindstr¨ om [198] with an upper bound adapted from El Alaouiet al.[103]; see
the work of Feige and Lellouche [115] for an accessible summary. The number
of tests is notably a factor 2 higher than a lower bound suggested by a simple
counting argument, as we will discuss further below.
Even ignoring constant factors, attaining an order-optimal number of tests
withpolynomial-time decodingis not straightforward. To our knowledge, this
goal was first achieved by Hahn-Klimroth and M¨ uller [148], using a spatially-
coupled test design akin to the one we surveyed in Section 4.5.2. Soleymani
and Javidi [260] further gave an algorithm with reduced decoding time, at the
expense of the number of tests slightly increasing toO(klog logk).
5.10. OTHER GROUP TESTING MODELS149
Beyond the sparse regime with noiseless nonadaptive testing, some notable
developments are outlined as follows:
•In the linear regimek= Θ(n), the optimal number of tests isO
  k
logk

,
which is sublinear with respect tok. In the case of random Bernoulli
testing, corresponding exact constants were established by El Alaouiet
al.[103] and Scarlett and Cevher [244]. 3 Despite this sharp information-
theoretic understanding, we are unaware of anyefficientalgorithms attain-
ing order-optimalO
  k
logk

scaling under Bernoulli testing. In particular,
even upon relaxing from exact recovery to approximate recovery, tech-
niques based on approximate message passing useO(k) tests [102, 267].
It was further shown in [266] that when spatial coupling is incorporated,
this improves too(k), albeit with an unspecified precise rate. On the
other hand,deterministicnonadaptive designs usingO
  k
logk

tests (when
k= Θ(n)) can be found in [197, 50, 287], and while computational com-
plexity was not their focus, more recent works [41, 193, 266] noted that
they can be decoded efficiently.
•Under adaptive testing withk=o(n), the information-theoretic lower
bound is halved from 2k
logk log n
k to k
logk log n
k (e.g., see [40, 115]). In-
tuitively, the difference is due to the fact that (i) for adaptive testing,
outcomes in{0,1,...,k}could (in principle) reveal up to log 2(k+ 1) =
(log2k)(1 +o(1)) bits per test; (ii) under nonadaptive testing, the number
of defectives in a given test concentrates within a window of width at most
O(
√
k), so the maximum number of bits learned is log 2
 
O
 √
k

, which
simplifies to
  1
2 log2k

(1 +o(1)). Bshouty [40] gave a polynomial-time
adaptive algorithm using
  Ck
logk log n
k

(1 +o(1)) tests (whenk=o(n)),
where the constant is proved to be in [2,4) and reported to be 2. 4 It re-
mains open as to whether the constant can be reduced to a smaller value
in [1,2), which would imply that adaptivity provably helps. Numerical
evidence supporting this possibility was given by Soleymani and Javidi
[261].
•Noisy variants of quantitative group testing, under both the exact recovery
and approximate recovery criteria, have been studied in [41, 59, 244, 267,
193, 147, 266], among others. Without going into detail, we note that at
least in the case of exact recovery, the presence of noise typically leads to
strictly higher scaling in the required number of tests.
5.10.2 Tropical group testing
Another model whose study has aligned with the techniques surveyed this mono-
graph is thetropical group testingmodel of Wang, Gabrys and Vardy [285]. In
this model, items can have different levels of defectivity, and the outcome of a
given test is also a (non-binary) defectivity level. Various results in [285, 229],
3See also [196] for considerably earlier work on the case that there is no pre-specified
sparsity level, so the algorithm must work for allk≤n. The works [103, 244] are studying a
more general ‘pooled data’ problem, of which quantitative group testing is a special case.
4More specifically, the constant is 2 under ‘favourable rounding’ of a suitable submatrix
to the next power of two, and [40, Note of Thm. 4] states that this rounding issue can be
circumvented, but we are unaware of any follow-up work showing this formally.
150CHAPTER 5. OTHER TOPICS IN GROUP TESTING
some of which we outline below, reveal that tropical testing can succeed with
fewer tests than standard binary group testing.
The model is as follows: There aredlevels of positive defectivity{1,2,...,d},
from 1 being the strongest level of defectivity todbeing the weakest, with non-
defectivity now being denoted by∞rather than 0. The output of noiseless
tropical testing is the strongest defectivity level – that is, the minimum associ-
ated value – of any item present in the test. Whend= 1, this is equivalent to
the standard binary testing model. The term ‘tropical’ is used due to similar
use of the ‘minimum’ operation in the subject of tropical geometry.
An equivalent model also appears in the book of Du and Hwang [97, Ch. 6],
along with a simple adaptive algorithm that repeatedly uses binary splitting
techniques to identify the current ‘most defective’ item. However, the only
relevant existing work cited in [97] is that of Hwang and Xu [157], who studied
the significantly more specific setting in which one item is ‘more defective’, one
item is ‘less defective’, and the remainingn−2 items are nondefective.
The tropical model is appropriate for settings where the defectivity of a
group is determined by its most defective member – one may think of the the
total capacity of a series of pipes, whose bottleneck is the lowest-capacity pipe.
The tropical model is of particular interest for modelling PCR testing for Covid-
19 or other virus-borne illnesses. In PCR testing, the viral concentration in a
sample is so weak that it must undergo multiple cycles of amplification until it
reaches a detectable concentration. The defectivity level can be then thought
of as the number of cycles required to reach a threshold level: the strongest
concentrations will require only a small number of cycles, while the weakest
concentrations will require many cycles. (A noninfected sample will never reach
the threshold no matter how many cycles it goes through, hence denoting it
by∞.) It is often the case that viral concentrations within a collection of
individuals differ by so many orders of magnitude that the number of cycles
needed by a pooled sample is dictated by the number of cycles required for the
most concentrated individual sample, thus leading to the tropical model. Of
course, this is not exact; many weak samples could potentially combine to make
a stronger pooled sample; see [229] for further discussion of the tropical model
as an approximation to PCR testing.
The output of tropical group testing is one of thedpositive levels{1,2,...,d}
or a negative result∞. This is more informative than the simple positive–
negative outcome (previously denoted{0,1}) of binary group testing, which
suggests that the tropical model might require fewer tests than the binary model.
On the other hand, in tropical group testing, existing works have aimed to not
only recover which items are defective, but also recover the defectivity level of
each such item; this will require more information than learning the defective
set alone, suggesting that more tests could be needed.
Compared to binary group testing, or even quantitative group testing, the
study of tropical group testing is in its relatively early stages. Under the
Bernoulli test design, Paligadu, Johnson, and Aldridge [229] give several coun-
terparts to the algorithms and results of [16] that we surveyed in Chapter 2.
We briefly outline some of the results of [229]; throughout, we writek 1,...,k d
for the number of items having each positive defectivity level,k= Pd
i=1ki for
the total number of defectives, andnfor the total number of items.
First, a ‘tropical COMP’ algorithm is defined as follows: Declare each item’s
5.10. OTHER GROUP TESTING MODELS151
defectivity level to be the weakest defectivity level (that is, the highest value)
of any test it appears in. This precisely recovers the usual COMP algorithm
when the number of levels isd= 1. Under the Bernoulli design, tropical
COMP succeeds with the same asymptotic number of tests as the binary case,
(eklnn)(1 +o(1)).
Second, [229] defines and analyses a ‘tropical DD’ algorithm. For tropical
DD, the number of tests is somewhat more complicated, as it is written as the
maximum of a number of terms (one per defectivity level). The number of tests
can be significantly smaller than COMP, and is even seen to be asymptotically
optimal in certain parameter regimes via an analogous argument to that of
SSS (Section 2.2). Tropical DD is seen to outperform both tropical COMP
and classical DD in numerical experiments, and these experiments also suggest
further improvements via a ‘tropical SCOMP’ algorithm.
Finally, a simple counting argument leads to an analogue of the count-
ing bound with log 2
 n
k

replaced by log d+1
 n
k

, where
 n
k

= n!
k1!...kd!(n−k)! is
the multinomial coefficient. Whenk= Θ(n α) forα∈(0,1), this scales as
Θ
  klogn
log(d+1)

, as opposed to Θ(klogn) for the binary model. The denominator
of log(d+1) has a similar interpretation to that in the quantitative group testing
model outlined above.
These results leave several interesting questions open for future work. For ex-
ample, further analogous results to those of the binary model could be sought in
the form of information-theoretic achievability results, improvements via near-
constant tests-per-item designs, improved converse bounds for arbitrary non-
adaptive designs, and so on.
5.10.3 Other models
Beyond the quantitative and tropical models, we provide a partial list of other
models that have been considered in the literature.
•Thesemi-quantitative model[105] lies in between the two extremes of the
standard model and the quantitative model. The model has a number of
thresholds, and we get to observe the largest of those thresholds that the
number of defective items in the test|{i∈K:x i = 1}|is greater than or
equal to. See also [106, 192, 65] for follow-up work on this model.
•Various forms ofthreshold group testingoutput a 0 if there are too few
defectives, output a 1 if there are sufficiently many defectives, and exhibit
either random [185] or adversarial [86, 64] behaviour in between the two
corresponding thresholds. We presented a simple randomized version of
this model in Example 3.7.
•Other models have been considered with more than two types of items,
with a prominent example beinggroup testing with inhibitorsintroduced
by Farachet al.[114] and discussed in [98, Chapter 8]. In the simplest
case, each item is either defective, an inhibitor, or neither of the two, and
the test is positive if and only if it contains at least one defective but no
inhibitors. In other words, inhibitors may ‘hide’ the fact that the test
contains one or more defective items. Some results concerning this model
are provided, for example, in [92, 128].
152CHAPTER 5. OTHER TOPICS IN GROUP TESTING
•Beyond the tropical group testing model outlined above, other models
motivated by PCR and medical testing can be found in [134, 125, 17] and
the references therein.
•Various frameworks have been studied for understanding highly general
models in a unified manner. In particular, incomplex group testing[272,
55, 68], as well as an equivalent problem based on hypergraph learning
[20, 2], the problem is described by ageneral setof subsets of items whose
simultaneous inclusion in a test leads to a positive outcome. Another
example isgeneralized group testing[60], in which the probability of a
positive test is an arbitrary increasing function of the number of defectives
in the test (see also [220] for a related density-dependent model).
While some of the models listed above can be studied under the information-
theoretic framework considered in Chapter 4, characterizing the number of tests
still requires the non-trivial step of bounding mutual information terms, for
example, as in Theorem 4.7. This has been done for the quantitative group
testing model in [244], and in certain random models for threshold group testing
in [185].
Despite this, several upper and lower bounds on the number of tests required
in the above models have indeed been developed, often using rather different
approaches compared to the standard setting. Hence, it is of significant interest
to further study what the information theory perspective can provide for these
models, potentially building on the concepts and techniques surveyed in this
monograph.
Chapter 6
Conclusion and Open
Problems
In this monograph, we have surveyed recent theoretical and algorithmic develop-
ments in group testing, with an emphasis on achievable rates characterizing the
asymptotic number of bits learned per test by a successful group testing strat-
egy. We have particularly focused on nonadaptive testing in the small-error
regime with a number of defectives scaling ask= Θ(n α).
In the noiseless setting (Chapter 2), we presented the achievable rates of
COMP and DD, considering both the Bernoulli design and the near-constant
tests-per-item design. We also observed that the SCOMP and linear program-
ming (LP) algorithms to perform better experimentally while achieving rates
at least as high as DD (which in turn exceed those of COMP). In the noisy
setting (Chapter 3), we presented noisy variants of COMP, DD, and LP, as
well as two additional algorithms: separate decoding of items, which is conve-
nient to analyse theoretically; and belief propagation, which performs very well
experimentally but currently lacks a theoretical analysis.
In Chapter 4, we surveyed the information-theoretic limits of group test-
ing, again considering the Bernoulli design and the near-constant tests-per-item
design. In the noiseless setting, we concluded that the information-theoretic
threshold for the near-constant tests-per-item design is in fact optimal among
allnonadaptive designs, and moreover, that this threshold can be attained in
a computationally efficient manner using a spatially coupled design. We also
surveyed analogous developments in the noisy setting.
In Chapter 5, we surveyed a wide range of important variants of the standard
group testing problem, including approximate recovery, multi-stage adaptive
algorithms, counting defectives, sublinear-time decoding, linear sparsity, non-
uniform prior statistics, explicit constructions, constrained test designs, compu-
tational considerations, and other group testing models.
We conclude the monograph by discussing some open (and formerly open)
problems. We first restate the problems posed in the first edition and indicate
to what extent they have been resolved. We then present a few further open
problems that are new to this edition.
153
154CHAPTER 6. CONCLUSION AND OPEN PROBLEMS
Open problems from the first edition
In the following, we detail the open problems from the first edition, as well as
indicating the extent to which they have been solved.
Open Problem 1. (Solved)What is the capacity of nonadaptive group testing
in the sparse regime, wherek= Θ(n α)withα∈(0,1)?
As outlined above and detailed in Chapter 4, this problem is now settled due
to the work of Coja-Oghlanet al.[76]: The optimal rate (the capacity) is that at-
tained by the near-constant column weight design, RNCC = min

1,(ln 2) 1−α
α
	
.
Analogous results can also be found in [31] for denser regimes, including “mildly
sublinear” regimes such ask= Θ
  n
logn

.
Open Problem 2. (Remains open)What more can be said about finite-size
group testing problems using information-theoretic methods?
Results regarding the rate of group testing indicate how the numberT=
T(n) of tests required behaves asn→∞. However, in practice, we might be
interested in a fairly modest number of items, perhaps of the order 100 to 10,000.
In such cases, results concerning the asymptotic rate may be of limited value,
particularly if log2
 n
k

/Tonly converges slowly to the maximum achievable rate.
A natural question is then what we say about the number of tests required with
such ‘finiten’. Information-theoretic approaches to ‘finite blocklength’ results
in channel coding were pioneered by Polyanskiy, Poor and Verd´ u [230], and
similar ideas may be useful for better understanding group testing.
One existing work in this direction is [169], which built on the ideas of [230]
to develop converse results that generalize Theorem 1.1. However, in stark con-
trast with channel coding, counterparts for theachievabilitypart appear to be
unexplored. Some of the analyses surveyed in this monograph, such as those of
COMP (Section 2.3) and two-stage conservative testing (Section 5.5.2), are suffi-
ciently simple that analogous non-asymptotic bounds could be inferred without
too much difficulty. However, other analyses, notably including information-
theoretic achievability (Section 4.2), are heavily reliant on asymptotics, often
including terms that decay to zero very slowly.
Open Problem 3. (Solved)Find a practical decoding algorithm (and a non-
adaptive test design) that achieves a rate higher thanln 2≈0.693, or prove that
no such algorithm exists.
We stated this problem based on the observation that prominent practical
algorithms such as COMP and DD achieve rates of at most ln 2 for allθ∈(0,1).
If we take ‘practical’ to mean ‘polynomial-time’, then the above-mentioned
results of [76] provide much more than what this open problem asked, giving
a polynomial-time method based on spatial coupling that attains theoptimal
ratefor allα∈(0,1). However, this spatial coupling technique has not been
tested experimentally to the best of our knowledge, so we pose Open Problem
10 below addressing its practical performance.
Open Problem 4. (Solved)Establish improved achievable rates and converse
results for noisy nonadaptive group testing.
This problem was addressed in detail concurrently by Chen and Scarlett [58]
and Coja-Oghlanet al.[78], as we outlined in Section 4.6.2. An important re-
maining open problem regarding converse bounds for general designs is given as
155
Open Problem 11 below. We also present Open Problem 12 regardingadaptive
testing in the sublinear sparsity regime (see Section 5.5.4 for the linear regime).
Open Problem 5.This problem has two parts:
(a)(Solved)What are the fundamental limits of noiseless group testing in
the linear regime with exact recovery and a constant error probability in(0,1)?
(b)(Remains open)What are the fundamental limits of noiseless group
testing in the linear regime with approximate recovery?
In Section 5.5, we discussed the linear regimek∼βn, and showed that in
the nonadaptive setting with exact recovery and the small-error criterion (i.e.,
asymptotically vanishing error probability), it is optimal to test every item
individually. However, these results do not rule out the possibility of using
fewer tests when the allowed error probability is a fixed constant, e.g., 0.1 or
0.5. As discussed in Section 5.5.1, it is now known from [31] that allowing some
error probability does not help much. Specifically, for arbitrarily smallη >0,
at leastn(1−η) tests are needed to avoid having the error probability approach
one asn→∞.
On the other hand, Tan, Tan, and Scarlett [268] showed that significantly
fewer tests suffice for high-probabilityapproximate recovery, particularly when
βis small in the relationk∼βn. However, there still remains significant room
for further results, including both converse results and improved achievability
results. Hence, we label this problem as still being largely open.
Open Problem 6. (Solved)Find a nonadaptive group testing algorithm that
succeeds withO(klogn)tests and hasO(klogn)decoding time.
This goal was concurrently achieved by Price and Scarlett [233] and Cher-
aghchi and Nakos [67], as we summarized in Section 5.4.3.
Open Problem 7.This problem has two parts:
(a)(Partially solved)Establish precise achievable rates for group testing
algorithms with sublinear decoding time.
(b)(Remains open)Establish precise achievable rates for group testing
algorithms with an explicit construction of the test matrix.
Bounds on the number of tests for group testing with sublinear-time decoding
(Section 5.4) and/or explicit test designs (Section 5.7) are usually given using
O(·) notation, and thus do not provide explicit achievable rates. Naturally,
understanding the constant factors in detail would significantly sharpen our
understanding of these settings.
This goal was addressed for sublinear-time decoding by Wang and Gu-
ruswami [284], who obtained constants arbitrarily close to those of the COMP
and DD algorithms, and left open the problem of obtaining further improve-
ments. When it comes to explicit designs, there has been little or no progress in
this direction, to the best of our knowledge. In both settings, further progress
may be based on trying to further refine the analysis of existing methods, or it
may be that that new algorithmic ideas are needed in order to obtain the best
rates possible.
Open Problem 8. (Remains open)Prove the Hu–Hwang–Wang conjecture,
that individual testing is optimal for adaptive combinatorial zero-error group
testing whenk≥n/3.
Adaptive testing in the linear regime wherek∼βnwas discussed in Section
5.5.3. In particular, for zero-error testing (with the combinatorial prior), we
156CHAPTER 6. CONCLUSION AND OPEN PROBLEMS
saw that one could improve on testing each item individually whenβ < 1
3. Hu,
Hwang and Wang [155] conjecture that this result is tight, in the sense that one
requiresT≥n−1 whenβ≥ 1
3. (Recall that, sincekis known, we need not
test the final item, hence we need onlyn−1 tests for ‘individual testing’.) The
best known result is that individual testing is optimal forβ≥1−log 3 2≈0.369
[234].
Open Problem 9. (Remains open)What does the information theory per-
spective have to offer other non-standard group testing models, and more general
structured signal recovery problems?
This question was intentionally open-ended, and we emphasize that infor-
mation theory has indeed already played a major role in extensive problems
concerning structured signal recovery and high-dimensional statistics. More-
over, since the first edition, there has been substantial progress in various group
testing models including quantitative group testing [148, 147, 267, 260] and trop-
ical group testing [285, 229], among others. Nevertheless, we expect that there
is still substantial room for further work, so we mark this problem as generally
still remaining open.
Newly added open problems
We conclude this chapter by presenting three open problems that are new to
the second edition.
Open Problem 10.What is the experimental performance of the asymptoti-
cally optimal spatially coupled group testing design, and to what extent can this
design be beneficial in applications?
The spatially coupled design outlined in Section 4.5.2 provided a major the-
oretical breakthrough in attaining the optimal rates of noiseless group testing
while permitting polynomial-time decoding. (See also Section 4.6.2 regarding
the noisy setting.) However, to our knowledge, such designs have not been
tested experimentally at practical values of the number of itemsn. We expect
that some practical adjustments might be required, e.g., avoiding fixed param-
eter choices such asℓ= √lognands= log lognand instead treating these as
tunable parameters. Nevertheless, it would be interest to determine whether the
design can be preferable to the regular near-constant column weight design (or
other designs that perform well in practice) after such adjustments for practical
problem sizes.
Open Problem 11.For noisy group testing, is the rate achieved by the near-
constant column weight design equal to the optimal rate among all nonadaptive
designs?
In the noiseless setting, the corresponding question is known to have an
affirmative answer (see Section 4.5). Thus, it is fairly natural to expect the same
in the noisy setting. On the other hand, the noisy setting has a significantly
more complicated achievable rate expression with distinct error events arising,
and new phenomena are observed such as the choiceν= ln 2 (in the design
parameterL=νT/k) no longer necessarily being optimal. Thus, it remains
entirely conceivable that other designs can do better.
Both a positive and negative answer to the asymptotic optimality of the
near-constant column design would have significant implications. In particular,
157
a positive answer would imply that the spatially coupled design from [78] is also
asymptotically optimal, meaning that we have a polynomial-time strategy that
attains the optimal rate. On the other hand, a negative answer would imply
that noiseless and noisy group testing have deeper fundamental differences than
the current results suggest.
Open Problem 12.What are the optimal rates of noisy adaptive group testing
in the sublinear sparsity regime?
This question is related to two directions in noisy settings that have already
been solved — exact rates are known for the two most widely-usednonadaptive
test designs in the sublinear sparsity regime (see Section 4.6.2), and optimal
thresholds for adaptive testing are known in thelinear sparsity regime(see
Section 5.5.4). However, for adaptive testing in the sublinear regime, non-minor
gaps remain between the best known upper and lower bounds on the optimal
rate (see Section 5.2). It is unclear to what extent the techniques from the
linear regime are applicable; for instance, the algorithm in [152] assigns each
item some individual tests, but in the sublinear regime we do not have enough
tests to do so.
Bibliography
[1] H. Abasi and N. H. Bshouty. On learning graphs with edge-detecting
queries. InInternational Conference on Algorithmic Learning Theory
(ALT), pages 3–30, 2019.url:https://proceedings.mlr.press/v98/
abasi19a.
[2] H. Abasi, N. H. Bshouty, and H. Mazzawi. Non-adaptive learning of a
hidden hypergraph.Theoretical Computer Science, 716:15–27, 2018.doi:
10.1016/j.tcs.2017.11.019.
[3] A. Agarwal, S. Jaggi, and A. Mazumdar. Novel impossibility results for
group-testing. InIEEE International Symposium on Information Theory
(ISIT), pages 2579–2583, 2018.doi:10.1109/ISIT.2018.8437471.
[4] A. Agarwal, O. Milenkovic, S. Pattabiraman, and J. Ribeiro. Group test-
ing with runlength constraints for topological molecular storage. InIEEE
International Symposium on Information Theory (ISIT), pages 132–137.
IEEE, 2020.doi:10.1109/ISIT44484.2020.9174502.
[5] S. Ahn, W.-N. Chen, and A. ¨Ozg¨ ur. Adaptive group testing on net-
works with community structure: The stochastic block model.IEEE
Transactions on Information Theory, 69(7):4758–4776, 2023.doi:
10.1109/TIT.2023.3247520.
[6] M. Aigner. Search problems on graphs.Discrete Applied Mathematics,
14(3):215–230, 1986.doi:10.1016/0166-218X(86)90026-0.
[7] M. Aigner and E. Triesch. Searching for an edge in a graph.Journal of
Graph Theory, 12(1):45–57, 1988.doi:10.1002/jgt.3190120106.
[8] C. Aksoylar, G. K. Atia, and V. Saligrama. Sparse signal processing with
linear and nonlinear observations: A unified Shannon-theoretic approach.
IEEE Transactions on Information Theory, 63(2):749–776, 2017.doi:
10.1109/TIT.2016.2605122.
[9] M. Aldridge.Interference mitigation in large random wireless networks.
PhD thesis, University of Bristol, 2011, arXiv:1109.1255.
[10] M. Aldridge. The capacity of Bernoulli nonadaptive group testing.
IEEE Transactions on Information Theory, 63(11):7142–4148, 2017.doi:
10.1109/TIT.2017.2748564.
158
BIBLIOGRAPHY159
[11] M. Aldridge. On the optimality of some group testing algorithms. InIEEE
International Symposium on Information Theory (ISIT), pages 3085–
3089, 2017.doi:10.1109/ISIT.2017.8007097.
[12] M. Aldridge. Individual testing is optimal for nonadaptive group testing in
the linear regime.IEEE Transactions on Information Theory, 65(4):2058–
2061, 2019.doi:10.1109/TIT.2018.2873136.
[13] M. Aldridge. Rates of adaptive group testing in the linear regime. InIEEE
International Symposium on Information Theory (ISIT), pages 236–240,
2019.doi:10.1109/ISIT.2019.8849712.
[14] M. Aldridge. Conservative two-stage group testing in the linear regime,
2020, arXiv:2005.06617.
[15] M. Aldridge, L. Baldassini, and K. Gunderson. Almost separable matri-
ces.Journal of Combinatorial Optimization, 33(1):215–236, 2017.doi:
10.1007/s10878-015-9951-1.
[16] M. Aldridge, L. Baldassini, and O. T. Johnson. Group testing algorithms:
Bounds and simulations.IEEE Transactions on Information Theory,
60(6):3671–3687, 2014.doi:10.1109/TIT.2014.2314472.
[17] M. Aldridge and D. Ellis. Pooled testing and its applications in the
COVID-19 pandemic. In M. d. C. Boado-Penas, J. Eisenberg, and
S ¸. S ¸ahin, editors,Pandemics: Insurance and Social Protection, pages 217–
249. Springer, 2022.doi:10.1007/978-3-030-78334-1_11. Extended
version, arXiv: 2105.08845.
[18] A. Allemann. An efficient algorithm for combinatorial group testing. In
H. Aydinian, F. Cicalese, and C. Deppe, editors,Information Theory,
Combinatorics, and Search Theory: In Memory of Rudolf Ahlswede, pages
569–596. Springer, 2013.doi:10.1007/978-3-642-36899-8_29.
[19] A. Ambainis, A. Belovs, O. Regev, and R. De Wolf. Efficient quantum
algorithms for (gapped) group testing and junta testing. InACM-SIAM
Symposium On Discrete Algorithms (SODA), pages 903–922, 2016.doi:
10.1137/1.9781611974331.ch65.
[20] D. Angluin and J. Chen. Learning a hidden graph usingO(logn) queries
per edge.Journal of Computer and System Sciences, 74(4):546–556, 2008.
doi:10.1016/j.jcss.2007.06.006.
[21] B. Arasli and S. Ulukus. Group testing with a graph infection spread
model.Information, 14(1):48, 2023.doi:10.3390/info14010048.
[22] R. B. Ash.Information Theory. Dover Publications Inc., New York, 1990.
[23] G. K. Atia, S. Aeron, E. Ermis, and V. Saligrama. On throughput max-
imization and interference avoidance in cognitive radios. InIEEE Con-
sumer Communications and Networking Conference (CCNC), pages 963–
967, 2008.doi:10.1109/ccnc08.2007.222.
160BIBLIOGRAPHY
[24] G. K. Atia and V. Saligrama. Boolean compressed sensing and noisy
group testing.IEEE Transactions on Information Theory, 58(3):1880–
1901, 2012.doi:10.1109/TIT.2011.2178156. See also [25].
[25] G. K. Atia, V. Saligrama, and C. Aksoylar. Correction to ‘Boolean com-
pressed sensing and noisy group testing’.IEEE Transactions on Informa-
tion Theory, 61(3):1507–1507, 2015.doi:10.1109/TIT.2015.2392116.
[26] A. Atıcı and R. A. Servedio. Quantum algorithms for learning and test-
ing juntas.Quantum Information Processing, 6(5):323–348, 2007.doi:
10.1007/s11128-007-0061-6.
[27] M. A. Attia, W.-T. Chang, and R. Tandon. Heterogeneity aware two-stage
group testing.IEEE Transactions on Signal Processing, 69:3977–3990,
2021.doi:10.1109/TSP.2021.3093785.
[28] B. Austhof, L. Reyzin, and E. Tani. Non-adaptive learning of random
hypergraphs with queries, 2025, arXiv:2501.12771.
[29] L. Baldassini, O. T. Johnson, and M. Aldridge. The capacity of adaptive
group testing. InIEEE International Symposium on Information Theory
(ISIT), pages 2676–2680, 2013.doi:10.1109/ISIT.2013.6620712.
[30] D. J. Balding, W. J. Bruno, D. C. Torney, and E. Knill. A comparative
survey of non-adaptive pooling designs. In T. Speed and M. S. Waterman,
editors,Genetic Mapping and DNA Sequencing, pages 133–154. Springer,
1996.doi:10.1007/978-1-4612-0751-1_8.
[31] W. H. Bay, E. Price, and J. Scarlett. Optimal non-adaptive prob-
abilistic group testing in general sparsity regimes.Information and
Inference: A Journal of the IMA, 11(3):1037–1053, 2022.doi:
10.1093/imaiai/iaab020.
[32] T. Berger and V. I. Levenshtein. Asymptotic efficiency of two-stage dis-
junctive testing.IEEE Transactions on Information Theory, 48(7):1741–
1749, 2002.doi:10.1109/TIT.2002.1013122.
[33] T. Berger, N. Mehravari, D. Towsley, and J. Wolf. Random multiple-
access communication and group testing.IEEE Transactions on Commu-
nications, 32(7):769–779, 1984.doi:10.1109/TCOM.1984.1096146.
[34] H. Black, E. Lee, A. Mazumdar, and B. Saha. Clustering with non-
adaptive subset queries. InAdvances in Neural Information Processing
Systems, volume 37, pages 56446–56478, 2024.url:https://dl.acm.
org/doi/10.5555/3737916.3739714.
[35] E. Blais. Testing juntas: A brief survey. In O. Goldreich, editor,Property
Testing: Current research and surveys, pages 32–40. Springer, 2010.doi:
10.1007/978-3-642-16367-8_4.
[36] B. H. Bloom. Space/time trade-offs in hash coding with allowable
errors.Communications of the ACM, 13(7):422–426, 1970.doi:
10.1145/362686.362692.
BIBLIOGRAPHY161
[37] S. Bondorf, B. Chen, J. Scarlett, H. Yu, and Y. Zhao. Sublinear-time
non-adaptive group testing withO(klogn) tests via bit-mixing coding,
2020.doi:10.1109/TIT.2020.3046113.
[38] M. S. Brennan, G. Bresler, S. Hopkins, J. Li, and T. Schramm. Statistical
query algorithms and low degree tests are almost equivalent. InConference
on Learning Theory, pages 774–774, 2021.url:https://proceedings.
mlr.press/v134/brennan21a.
[39] A. Z. Broder and R. Kumar. A note on double pooling tests, 2020, arXiv:
2004.01684.
[40] N. H. Bshouty. Optimal algorithms for the coin weighing problem with
a spring scale. InConference on Learning Theory, 2009.url:https:
//www.learningtheory.org/colt2009/papers/004.pdf.
[41] N. H. Bshouty. On the coin weighing problem with the presence
of noise. InInternational Workshop on Approximation Algorithms
for Combinatorial Optimization, pages 471–482. Springer, 2012.doi:
10.1007/978-3-642-32512-0_40.
[42] N. H. Bshouty. Lower bound for non-adaptive estimation of the number of
defective items. InInternational Symposium on Algorithms and Compu-
tation (ISAAC). Schloss-Dagstuhl-Leibniz Zentrum f¨ ur Informatik, 2019.
doi:10.4230/LIPIcs.ISAAC.2019.2.
[43] N. H. Bshouty. Improved lower bound for estimating the number of
defective items. InInternational Conference on Combinatorial Op-
timization and Applications, pages 303–315. Springer, 2023.doi:
10.1007/978-3-031-49611-0_22.
[44] N. H. Bshouty, V. E. Bshouty-Hurani, G. Haddad, T. Hashem, F. Khoury,
and O. Sharafy. Adaptive group testing algorithms to estimate the number
of defectives. InInternational Conference on Algorithmic Learning Theory
(ALT), pages 93–110, 2018.url:http://proceedings.mlr.press/v83/
bshouty18a.html.
[45] N. H. Bshouty and A. Costa. Exact learning of juntas from mem-
bership queries.Theoretical Computer Science, 742:82–97, 2018.doi:
10.1016/j.tcs.2017.12.032. Algorithmic Learning Theory.
[46] Q. Bui, S. Kliff, and M. Sanger-Katz. How to test more people
for coronavirus without actually needing more tests.The New York
Times, 2020.url:https://www.nytimes.com/interactive/2020/07/
27/upshot/coronavirus-pooled-testing.html.
[47] T. V. Bui, Y. M. Chee, J. Scarlett, and V. K. Vu. Group test-
ing with blocks of positives. InIEEE International Symposium
on Information Theory (ISIT), pages 1082–1087. IEEE, 2022.doi:
10.1109/ISIT50566.2022.9834611.
[48] P. Busschbach. Constructive methods to solve problems ofs-surjectivity,
conflict resolution, coding in defective memories, 1984. Rapport Interne
ENST 84 D005.
162BIBLIOGRAPHY
[49] S. Cai, M. Jahangoshahi, M. Bakshi, and S. Jaggi. Efficient algorithms
for noisy group testing.IEEE Transactions on Information Theory,
63(4):2113–2136, 2017.doi:10.1109/TIT.2017.2659619.
[50] D. G. Cantor and W. Mills. Determination of a subset from certain com-
binatorial properties.Canadian Journal of Mathematics, 18:42–48, 1966.
doi:10.4153/CJM-1966-007-2.
[51] S.-J. Cao, R. Goenka, C.-W. Wong, A. Rajwade, and D. Baron. Group
testing with side information via generalized approximate message pass-
ing.IEEE Transactions on Signal Processing, 71:2366–2375, 2023.doi:
10.1109/TSP.2023.3287671.
[52] C. L. Chan, P. H. Che, S. Jaggi, and V. Saligrama. Non-adaptive prob-
abilistic group testing with noisy measurements: Near-optimal bounds
with efficient algorithms. InAnnual Allerton Conference on Com-
munication, Control, and Computing, pages 1832–1839, 2011.doi:
10.1109/ALLERTON.2011.6120391.
[53] C. L. Chan, S. Jaggi, V. Saligrama, and S. Agnihotri. Non-
adaptive group testing: Explicit bounds and novel algorithms.IEEE
Transactions on Information Theory, 60(5):3019–3035, 2014.doi:
10.1109/TIT.2014.2310477.
[54] C. L. Chen and W. H. Swallow. Using group testing to estimate a propor-
tion, and to test the binomial model.Biometrics, 46(4):1035–1046, 1990.
doi:10.2307/2532446.
[55] H.-B. Chen, H.-L. Fu, and F. K. Hwang. An upper bound of the number of
tests in pooling designs for the error-tolerant complex model.Optimization
Letters, 2:425–431, 2008.doi:10.1007/s11590-007-0070-5.
[56] H.-B. Chen and F. K. Hwang. Exploring the missing link amongd-
separable, ¯d-separable andd-disjunct matrices.Discrete Applied Math-
ematics, 155(5):662–664, 2007.doi:10.1016/j.dam.2006.10.009.
[57] H.-B. Chen and F. K. Hwang. A survey on nonadaptive group testing
algorithms through the angle of decoding.Journal of Combinatorial Op-
timization, 15(1):49–59, 2008.doi:10.1007/s10878-007-9083-3.
[58] J. Chen and J. Scarlett. Exact thresholds for noisy non-adaptive group
testing. InACM-SIAM Symposium on Discrete Algorithms (SODA), 2025.
doi:10.1137/1.9781611978322.159.
[59] W.-N. Chen and I.-H. Wang. Partial data extraction via noisy his-
togram queries: Information theoretic bounds. InIEEE International
Symposium on Information Theory (ISIT), pages 2488–2492, 2017.doi:
10.1109/ISIT.2017.8006977.
[60] X. Cheng, S. Jaggi, and Q. Zhou. Generalized group testing. In
International Conference on Artificial Intelligence and Statistics (AIS-
TATS), pages 10777–10835, 2022.url:https://proceedings.mlr.
press/v151/cheng22a.html.
BIBLIOGRAPHY163
[61] Y. Cheng. An efficient randomized group testing procedure to determine
the number of defectives.Operations Research Letters, 39(5):352–354,
2011.doi:10.1016/j.orl.2011.07.001.
[62] M. Cheraghchi. Noise-resilient group testing: Limitations and construc-
tions. InInternational Symposium on Fundamentals of Computation The-
ory, pages 62–73, 2009.doi:10.1007/978-3-642-03409-1_7.
[63] M. Cheraghchi. Derandomization and group testing. InAllerton Confer-
ence on Communication, Control, and Computing, pages 991–997, 2010.
doi:10.1109/ALLERTON.2010.5707017.
[64] M. Cheraghchi. Improved constructions for non-adaptive thresh-
old group testing.Algorithmica, 67(3):384–417, 2013.doi:
10.1007/s00453-013-9754-7.
[65] M. Cheraghchi, R. Gabrys, and O. Milenkovic. Semiquantitative
group testing in at most two rounds. InIEEE International Sym-
posium on Information Theory (ISIT), pages 1973–1978, 2021.doi:
10.1109/ISIT45174.2021.9518270.
[66] M. Cheraghchi, A. Karbasi, S. Mohajer, and V. Saligrama. Graph-
constrained group testing.IEEE Transactions on Information Theory,
58(1):248–262, 2012.doi:10.1109/TIT.2011.2169535.
[67] M. Cheraghchi and V. Nakos. Combinatorial group testing and sparse
recovery schemes with near-optimal decoding time. InIEEE Annual Sym-
posium on Foundations of Computer Science (FOCS), pages 1203–1213,
2020.doi:10.1109/FOCS46700.2020.00115.
[68] F. Y. Chin, H. C. Leung, and S.-M. Yiu. Non-adaptive complex group
testing with multiple positive sets.Theoretical Computer Science, 505:11–
18, 2013.doi:10.1016/j.tcs.2013.04.011.
[69] V. Chvatal. A greedy heuristic for the set-covering problem.
Mathematics of Operations Research, 4(3):233–235, 1979.doi:
10.1287/moor.4.3.233.
[70] L. Ciampiconi, B. Ghosh, J. Scarlett, and K. S. Meel. A MaxSAT-based
framework for group testing. InAAAI Conference on Artificial Intelli-
gence, pages 10144–10152, 2020.doi:10.1609/aaai.v34i06.6574.
[71] F. Cicalese, P. Damaschke, and U. Vaccaro. Optimal group testing al-
gorithms with interval queries and their application to splice site detec-
tion.International Journal of Bioinformatics Research and Applications,
1(4):363–388, 2005.doi:10.1504/IJBRA.2005.008441.
[72] R. Clifford, K. Efremenko, E. Porat, and A. Rothschild. Pattern matching
with don’t cares and few errors.Journal of Computer and System Sciences,
76(2):115–124, 2010.doi:10.1016/j.jcss.2009.06.002.
[73] A. Cohen, A. Cohen, and O. Gurewitz. Efficient data collection over
multiple access wireless sensors network.IEEE/ACM Transactions on
Networking, 28(2):491–504, 2020.doi:10.1109/TNET.2020.2964764.
164BIBLIOGRAPHY
[74] A. Cohen, N. Shlezinger, S. Salamatian, Y. C. Eldar, and M. M´ edard. Se-
rial quantization for sparse time sequences.IEEE Transactions on Signal
Processing, 69:3299–3314, 2021.doi:10.1109/TSP.2021.3083985.
[75] A. Coja-Oghlan, O. Gebhard, M. Hahn-Klimroth, and P. Loick.
Information-theoretic and algorithmic thresholds for group testing.IEEE
Transactions on Information Theory, 66(12):7911–7928, 2020.url:
10.1109/TIT.2020.3023377.
[76] A. Coja-Oghlan, O. Gebhard, M. Hahn-Klimroth, and P. Loick. Optimal
group testing. InConference on Learning Theory, pages 1374–1388, 2020.
url:https://proceedings.mlr.press/v125/coja-oghlan20a.html.
[77] A. Coja-Oghlan, O. Gebhard, M. Hahn-Klimroth, A. S. Wein, and
I. Zadik. Statistical and computational phase transitions in group test-
ing. InConference on Learning Theory, pages 4764–4781, 2022.url:
https://proceedings.mlr.press/v178/coja-oghlan22a.
[78] A. Coja-Oghlan, M. Hahn-Klimroth, L. Hintze, D. Kaaser, L. Krieg,
M. Rolvien, and O. Scheftelowitsch. Noisy group testing via spatial cou-
pling, 2025.doi:10.1017/S0963548324000336.
[79] A. Coja-Oghlan, M. Hahn-Klimroth, P. Loick, and M. Penschuck. Ef-
ficient and accurate group testing via belief propagation: An em-
pirical study. InInternational Symposium on Experimental Algo-
rithms. Schloss-Dagstuhl-Leibniz Zentrum f¨ ur Informatik, 2022.doi:
10.4230/LIPIcs.SEA.2022.8.
[80] C. J. Colbourn. Group testing for consecutive positives.Annals of Com-
binatorics, 3(1):37–41, 1999.doi:10.1007/BF01609873.
[81] T. H. Cormen, C. E. Leiserson, R. L. Rivest, and C. Stein.Introduction
to Algorithms. The MIT Press, 3rd edition edition, 2009.url:https:
//dl.acm.org/doi/book/10.5555/1614191.
[82] G. Cormode and S. Muthukrishnan. What’s hot and what’s not: Tracking
most frequent items dynamically.ACM Transactions on Database Systems
(TODS), 30(1):249–278, 2005.doi:10.1145/1061318.1061325.
[83] T. M. Cover and J. A. Thomas.Elements of Information Theory. Wiley-
Interscience, 2nd edition edition, 2006.doi:10.1002/047174882X.
[84] I. Csisz´ ar and J. K¨ orner.Information Theory: Coding Theorems for
Discrete Memoryless Systems. Cambridge University Press, 2011.doi:
10.1017/CBO9780511921889. 2nd edition.
[85] R. N. Curnow and A. P. Morris. Pooling DNA in the identification of
parents.Heredity, 80(1):101–109, 1998.doi:10.1038/sj.hdy.6882420.
[86] P. Damaschke. Threshold group testing. InGeneral Theory of Informa-
tion Transfer and Combinatorics, pages 707–718. Springer, 2006.doi:
10.1007/11889342_45.
BIBLIOGRAPHY165
[87] P. Damaschke. Adaptive group testing with a constrained number of
positive responses improved.Discrete Applied Mathematics, 205:208–212,
2016.doi:10.1016/j.dam.2016.01.010.
[88] P. Damaschke and A. S. Muhammad. Bounds for nonadaptive group
tests to estimate the amount of defectives. InCombinatorial Op-
timization and Applications (COCOA), pages 117–130, 2010.doi:
10.1007/978-3-642-17461-2_10.
[89] P. Damaschke and A. S. Muhammad. Competitive group testing
and learning hidden vertex covers with minimum adaptivity.Discrete
Mathematics, Algorithms and Applications, 2(03):291–311, 2010.doi:
10.1142/S179383091000067X.
[90] P. Damaschke and A. S. Muhammad. Randomized group testing both
query-optimal and minimal adaptive. InInternational Conference on Cur-
rent Trends in Theory and Practice of Computer Science, pages 214–225,
2012.doi:10.1007/978-3-642-27660-6_18.
[91] A. De Bonis, L. Gasieniec, and U. Vaccaro. Optimal two-stage algorithms
for group testing problems.SIAM Journal on Computing, 34(5):1253–
1270, 2005.doi:10.1137/S0097539703428002.
[92] A. De Bonis and U. Vaccaro. Improved algorithms for group testing
with inhibitors.Information Processing Letters, 67(2):57–64, 1998.doi:
10.1016/S0020-0190(98)00088-X.
[93] A. De Bonis and U. Vaccaro. Constructions of generalized superimposed
codes with applications to group testing and conflict resolution in multiple
access channels.Theoretical Computer Science, 306(1-3):223–243, 2003.
doi:10.1016/S0304-3975(03)00281-0.
[94] A. De Bonis and U. Vaccaro.ϵ-almost selectors and their applications
to multiple-access communication.IEEE Transactions on Information
Theory, 63(11):7304–7319, 2017.doi:10.1109/TIT.2017.2750178.
[95] A. Djackov. On a search model of false coins. In I. Csisz´ ar and P. Elias, ed-
itors,Topics in Information Theory, volume 16 ofColloquia Mathematica
Societatis J´ anos Bolyai, pages 163–170. North-Holland, 1975.
[96] R. Dorfman. The detection of defective members of large popula-
tions.The Annals of Mathematical Statistics, 14(4):436–440, 1943.doi:
10.1214/aoms/1177731363.
[97] D.-Z. Du and F. Hwang.Combinatorial Group Testing and Its Applica-
tions. World Scientific, 2nd edition edition, 1999.doi:10.1142/4252.
[98] D.-Z. Du and F. K. Hwang.Pooling Designs and Nonadaptive Group
Testing: Important Tools for DNA Sequencing. World Scientific, 2006.
doi:10.1142/6122.
[99] A. G. D’yachkov. Lectures on designing screening experiments, 2004,
arXiv:1401.7505. Lecture Note Series 10, POSTECH.
166BIBLIOGRAPHY
[100] A. G. D’yachkov and V. V. Rykov. Bounds on the length
of disjunctive codes.Problemy Peredachi Informatsii, 18(3):7–13,
1982.url:https://www.researchgate.net/publication/268498029_
Bounds_on_the_length_of_disjunctive_codes. Translation:Problems
of Information Transmission. 18(3): 166–171.
[101] A. G. D’yachkov and V. V. Rykov. A survey of superimposed code
theory.Problems of Control and Information Theory, 12(4):1–13,
1983.url:https://www.researchgate.net/publication/235008674_
Survey_of_Superimposed_Code_Theory.
[102] A. El Alaoui, A. Ramdas, F. Krzakala, L. Zdeborov´ a, and M. I. Jor-
dan. Decoding from pooled data: Phase transitions of message passing.
IEEE Transactions on Information Theory, 65(1):572–585, 2018.doi:
10.1109/TIT.2018.2855698.
[103] A. El Alaoui, A. Ramdas, F. Krzakala, L. Zdeborov´ a, and M. I. Jor-
dan. Decoding from pooled data: Sharp information-theoretic bounds.
SIAM Journal on Mathematics of Data Science, 1(1):161–188, 2019.doi:
10.1137/18M1183339.
[104] A. Emad and O. Milenkovic. Poisson group testing: A probabilistic model
for nonadaptive streaming Boolean compressed sensing. InIEEE Interna-
tional Conference on Acoustics, Speech and Signal Processing (ICASSP),
2014, pages 3335–3339, 2014.doi:10.1109/ICASSP.2014.6854218.
[105] A. Emad and O. Milenkovic. Semiquantitative group testing.IEEE
Transactions on Information Theory, 60(8):4614–4636, 2014.doi:
10.1109/TIT.2014.2327630.
[106] A. Emad and O. Milenkovic. Code construction and decoding algo-
rithms for semi-quantitative group testing with nonuniform thresholds.
IEEE Transactions on Information Theory, 62(4):1674–1687, 2016.doi:
10.1109/TIT.2016.2524002.
[107] A. Emad, K. R. Varshney, and D. M. Malioutov. A semiquantitative group
testing approach for learning interpretable clinical prediction rules. InSig-
nal Processing with Adaptive Sparse Structured Representations (SPARS),
2015.url:https://krvarshney.github.io/pubs/EmadVM_spars2015.
pdf.
[108] J. Engels, B. Coleman, and A. Shrivastava. Practical near neighbor search
via group testing.Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems,
34:9950–9962, 2021.url:https://dl.acm.org/doi/10.5555/3540261.
3541022.
[109] P. Erd˝ os and A. R´ enyi. On a classical problem of probability the-
ory.A Magyar Tudom´ anyos Akad´ emia Matematikai Kutat´ o Int´ ezet´ enek
K¨ ozlem´ enyei, 6:215–220, 1961.url:http://www.renyi.hu/~p_erdos/
1961-09.pdf.
[110] P. Erd˝ os and A. R´ enyi. On two problems of information theory.A Mag-
yar Tudom´ anyos Akad´ emia Matematikai Kutat´ o Int´ ezet´ enek K¨ ozlem´ enyei,
8:229–243, 1963.url:https://www.renyi.hu/ ~p_erdos/1963-12.pdf.
BIBLIOGRAPHY167
[111] Y. Erlich, A. Gilbert, H. Ngo, A. Rudra, N. Thierry-Mieg, M. Wootters,
D. Zielinski, and O. Zuk. Biological screens from linear codes: Theory
and tools.bioRxiv, 2015.doi:10.1101/035352.
[112] Y. Erlich, A. Gordon, M. Brand, G. Hannon, and P. Mitra. Compressed
genotyping.IEEE Transactions on Information Theory, 56(2):706–723,
2010.doi:10.1109/TIT.2009.2037043.
[113] M. Falahatgar, A. Jafarpour, A. Orlitsky, V. Pichapati, and A. T. Suresh.
Estimating the number of defectives with group testing. InIEEE Interna-
tional Symposium on Information Theory (ISIT), pages 1376–1380, 2016.
doi:10.1109/ISIT.2016.7541524.
[114] M. Farach, S. Kannan, E. Knill, and S. Muthukrishnan. Group testing
problems with sequences in experimental molecular biology. InProceedings
of Compression and Complexity of Sequences, pages 357–367, 1997.doi:
10.1109/SEQUEN.1997.666930.
[115] U. Feige and A. Lellouche. Quantitative group testing and the rank of
random matrices, 2020, arXiv:2006.09074.
[116] A. Feinstein. A new basic theorem of information theory.Transactions
of the IRE Professional Group on Information Theory, 4(4):2–22, 1954.
doi:10.1109/TIT.1954.1057459.
[117] W. Feller.An Introduction to Probability Theory and Its Applications,
volume I. John Wiley & Sons, 3rd edition, 1968.
[118] H. M. Finucan. The blood testing problem.Journal of the Royal Sta-
tistical Society Series C (Applied Statistics), pages 43–50, 1964.doi:
10.2307/2985222.
[119] P. Fischer, N. Klasner, and I. Wegenera. On the cut-off point for combi-
natorial group testing.Discrete Applied Mathematics, 91(1):83–92, 1999.
doi:10.1016/S0166-218X(98)00119-X.
[120] S. Foucart and H. Rauhut.A Mathematical Introduction to Compressive
Sensing. Birkh¨ auser, 2013.doi:10.1007/978-0-8176-4948-7.
[121] V. L. Freidlina. On a design problem for screening experiments.
Teoriya Veroyatnostei i ee Primeneniya, 20(1):100–114, 1975.doi:
10.1137/1120008. Translation:Theory of Probability & Its Applications.
20(1): 102–115.
[122] Z. F¨ uredi. Onr-cover-free families.Journal of Combinatorial Theory,
Series A, 73(1):172–173, 1996.doi:10.1006/jcta.1996.0012.
[123] T. Furon. The illusion of group testing. Technical Report RR-9164, In-
ria Rennes Bretagne Atlantique, 2018.url:https://hal.inria.fr/
hal-01744252.
[124] T. Furon, A. Guyader, and F. C´ erou. Decoding fingerprints using the
Markov Chain Monte Carlo method. InIEEE International Workshop on
Information Forensics and Security (WIFS), pages 187–192, 2012.doi:
10.1109/WIFS.2012.6412647.
168BIBLIOGRAPHY
[125] R. Gabrys, S. Pattabiraman, V. Rana, J. Ribeiro, M. Cheraghchi, V. Gu-
ruswami, and O. Milenkovic. AC–DC: Amplification curve diagnostics for
Covid-19 group testing, 2020, arXiv:2011.05223.
[126] V. Gandikota, E. Grigorescu, S. Jaggi, and S. Zhou. Nearly opti-
mal sparse group testing. InAnnual Allerton Conference on Com-
munication, Control, and Computing, pages 401–408, 2016.doi:
10.1109/ALLERTON.2016.7852259.
[127] A. Ganesan, S. Jaggi, and V. Saligrama. Learning immune-
defectives graph through group tests. InIEEE International Sym-
posium on Information Theory (ISIT), pages 66–70, 2015.doi:
10.1109/ISIT.2015.7282418.
[128] A. Ganesan, S. Jaggi, and V. Saligrama. Non-adaptive group testing with
inhibitors. InIEEE Information Theory Workshop (ITW), pages 1–5,
2015.doi:10.1109/ITW.2015.7133108.
[129] M. R. Garey and F. K. Hwang. Isolating a single defective using group
testing.Journal of the American Statistical Association, 69(345):151–153,
1974.doi:10.2307/2285514.
[130] J. L. Gastwirth and P. A. Hammick. Estimation of the prevalence of a
rare disease, preserving the anonymity of the subjects by group testing:
Application to estimating the prevalence of AIDS antibodies in blood
donors.Journal of Statistical Planning and Inference, 22(1):15–27, 1989.
doi:10.1016/0378-3758(89)90061-X.
[131] O. Gebhard, M. Hahn-Klimroth, D. Kaaser, and P. Loick. On the parallel
reconstruction from pooled data. In2022 IEEE International Parallel and
Distributed Processing Symposium (IPDPS), pages 425–435, 2022.doi:
10.1109/IPDPS53621.2022.00048.
[132] O. Gebhard, M. Hahn-Klimroth, O. Parczyk, M. Penschuck, M. Rolvien,
J. Scarlett, and N. Tan. Near-optimal sparsity-constrained group testing:
Improved bounds and algorithms.IEEE Transactions on Information
Theory, 68(5):3253–3280, 2022.doi:10.1109/TIT.2022.3141244.
[133] O. Gebhard, O. Johnson, P. Loick, and M. Rolvien. Improved
bounds for noisy group testing with constant tests per item.IEEE
Transactions on Information Theory, 68(4):2604–2621, 2021.doi:
10.1109/TIT.2021.3138489.
[134] S. Ghosh, R. Agarwal, M. A. Rehan, S. Pathak, P. Agarwal, Y. Gupta,
S. Consul, N. Gupta, R. Goenka, A. Rajwade, and M. Gopalkrishnan.
A compressed sensing approach to pooled RT-PCR testing for COVID-19
detection.IEEE Open Journal of Signal Processing, 2:248–264, 2021.doi:
10.1109/OJSP.2021.3075913.
[135] S. Ghosh, S. Saxena, and A. Rajwade. Efficient neural network based
classification and outlier detection for image moderation using compressed
sensing and group testing, 2023, arXiv:2305.07639.
BIBLIOGRAPHY169
[136] A. C. Gilbert, B. Hemenway, A. Rudra, M. J. Strauss, and M. Wootters.
Recovering simple signals. InInformation Theory and Applications Work-
shop (ITA), pages 382–391, 2012.doi:10.1109/ITA.2012.6181772.
[137] A. C. Gilbert, M. A. Iwen, and M. J. Strauss. Group testing and sparse
signal recovery. InAsilomar Conference on Signals, Systems and Com-
puters, pages 1059–1063, 2008.doi:10.1109/ACSSC.2008.5074574.
[138] A. C. Gilbert, M. J. Strauss, J. A. Tropp, and R. Vershynin. Al-
gorithmic linear dimension reduction in theℓ 1 norm for sparse vec-
tors. InAllerton Conference on Communication, Control, and Com-
puting, 2006.url:https://web.eecs.umich.edu/ ~martinjs/papers/
GSTV06-allerton.pdf.
[139] A. C. Gilbert, M. J. Strauss, J. A. Tropp, and R. Vershynin. One
sketch for all: Fast algorithms for compressed sensing. InACM Sym-
posium on Theory of Computing (STOC), pages 237–246, 2007.doi:
10.1145/1250790.1250824.
[140] C. Gille, K. Grade, and C. Coutelle. A pooling strategy for heterozy-
gote screening of the ∆F508 cystic fibrosis mutation.Human Genetics,
86(3):289–291, 1991.doi:10.1007/BF00202411.
[141] R. Goenka, S.-J. Cao, C.-W. Wong, A. Rajwade, and D. Baron. Con-
tact tracing enhances the efficiency of COVID-19 group testing. In
IEEE International Conference on Acoustics, Speech and Signal Process-
ing (ICASSP), pages 8168–8172, 2021.url:10.1109/ICASSP39728.
2021.9414034.
[142] C. Goldie and R. Pinch.Communication Theory. Cambridge University
Press, 1991.doi:10.1017/CBO9781139172448.
[143] M. Gonen, M. Langberg, and A. Sprintson. Group testing on general
set-systems. InIEEE International Symposium on Information Theory
(ISIT), pages 874–879, 2022.doi:10.1109/ISIT50566.2022.9834789.
[144] M. T. Goodrich, M. J. Atallah, and R. Tamassia. Indexing information
for data forensics. InApplied Cryptography and Network Security, pages
206–221, 2005.doi:10.1007/11496137_15.
[145] M. T. Goodrich and D. S. Hirschberg. Improved adaptive group testing
algorithms with applications to multiple access channels and dead sensor
diagnosis.Journal of Combinatorial Optimization, 15(1):95–121, 2008.
doi:10.1007/s10878-007-9087-z.
[146] V. Guruswami and H.-P. Wang. Nonadaptive noise-resilient group test-
ing with order-optimal tests and fast-and-reliable decoding, 2024, arXiv:
2311.08283.
[147] M. Hahn-Klimroth, D. Kaaser, and M. Rau. Efficient approximate recov-
ery from pooled data using doubly regular pooling schemes, 2023, arXiv:
2303.00043.
170BIBLIOGRAPHY
[148] M. Hahn-Klimroth and N. M¨ uller. Near optimal efficient decod-
ing from pooled data. InConference on Learning Theory, pages
3395–3409, 2022.url:https://proceedings.mlr.press/v178/
hahn-klimroth22a.html.
[149] T. S. Han.Information-Spectrum Methods in Information Theory.
Springer–Verlag, 2003.doi:10.1007/978-3-662-12066-8.
[150] N. J. Harvey, M. Patrascu, Y. Wen, S. Yekhanin, and V. W. Chan.
Non-adaptive fault diagnosis for all-optical networks via combinatorial
group testing on graphs. InIEEE International Conference on Com-
puter Communications (INFOCOM), pages 697–705. IEEE, 2007.doi:
10.1109/INFCOM.2007.87.
[151] J. F. Hayes. An adaptive technique for local distribution.IEEE
Transactions on Communications, 26(8):1178–1186, 1978.doi:
10.1109/TCOM.1978.1094204.
[152] L. Hintze, L. Krieg, O. Scheftelowitsch, and H. Zhu. Noisy group test-
ing in the linear regime: Exact thresholds and efficient algorithms. In
Conference on Learning Theory, pages 2805–2821, 2025.url:https:
//proceedings.mlr.press/v291/hintze25a.html.
[153] E. S. Hong and R. E. Ladner. Group testing for image compression.
IEEE Transactions on Image Processing, 11(8):901–911, 2002.doi:
10.1109/TIP.2002.801124.
[154] Y.-W. Hong and A. Scaglione. Group testing for sensor networks: The
value of asking the right questions. InAsilomar Conference on Sig-
nals, Systems and Computers, volume 2, pages 1297–1301, 2004.doi:
10.1109/ACSSC.2004.1399362.
[155] M. C. Hu, F. K. Hwang, and J. K. Wang. A boundary problem for group
testing.SIAM Journal on Algebraic Discrete Methods, 2(2):81–87, 1981.
doi:10.1137/0602011.
[156] W. Huleihel, O. Elishco, and M. M´ edard. Blind group testing.IEEE
Transactions on Information Theory, 65(8):5050–5063, 2019.doi:
10.1109/TIT.2019.2906607.
[157] F. Hwang and Y. Xu. Group testing to identify one defective and one
mediocre item.Journal of Statistical Planning and Inference, 17:367–373,
1987.doi:0378-3758(87)90127-3.
[158] F. K. Hwang. A method for detecting all defective members in a popu-
lation by group testing.Journal of the American Statistical Association,
67(339):605–608, 1972.doi:10.1080/01621459.1972.10481257.
[159] F. K. Hwang. A generalized binomial group testing problem.Jour-
nal of the American Statistical Association, 70(352):923–926, 1975.doi:
10.1080/01621459.1975.10480324.
BIBLIOGRAPHY171
[160] F. Iliopoulos and I. Zadik. Group testing and local search: Is there a
computational-statistical gap? InConference on Learning Theory, pages
2499–2551. PMLR, 2021.url:https://proceedings.mlr.press/v134/
iliopoulos21a.
[161] H. A. Inan, S. Ahn, P. Kairouz, and A. Ozgur. A group testing ap-
proach to random access for short-packet communication. InIEEE Inter-
national Symposium on Information Theory (ISIT), pages 96–100, 2019.
doi:10.1109/ISIT.2019.8849823.
[162] H. A. Inan, P. Kairouz, and A. Ozgur. Energy-limited massive ran-
dom access via noisy group testing. InIEEE International Sympo-
sium on Information Theory (ISIT), pages 1101–1105, 2018.doi:
10.1109/ISIT.2018.8437557.
[163] H. A. Inan, P. Kairouz, M. Wootters, and A. ¨Ozg¨ ur. On the optimal-
ity of the Kautz-Singleton construction in probabilistic group testing.
IEEE Transactions on Information Theory, 65(9):5592–5603, 2019.doi:
10.1109/TIT.2019.2902397.
[164] H. A. Inan and A. Ozgur. Strongly explicit and efficiently de-
codable probabilistic group testing. InIEEE International Sympo-
sium on Information Theory (ISIT), pages 525–530, 2020.doi:
10.1109/ISIT44484.2020.9174462.
[165] P. Indyk. Deterministic superimposed coding with applications to pat-
tern matching. In38th Annual Symposium on Foundations of Computer
Science (FOCS), pages 127–136, 1997.doi:10.1109/SFCS.1997.646101.
[166] P. Indyk, H. Q. Ngo, and A. Rudra. Efficiently decodable non-
adaptive group testing. InACM-SIAM Symposium on Discrete Algorithms
(SODA), pages 1126–1142, 2010.doi:10.1137/1.9781611973075.91.
[167] S. Jain, M. Cardone, and S. Mohajer. Probabilistic group testing in
distributed computing with attacked workers. InIEEE International
Symposium on Information Theory (ISIT), pages 1615–1620, 2023.doi:
10.1109/ISIT54713.2023.10206705.
[168] P. Johann. A group testing problem for graphs with several defec-
tive edges.Discrete Applied Mathematics, 117(1-3):99–108, 2002.doi:
10.1016/S0166-218X(01)00181-0.
[169] O. T. Johnson. Strong converses for group testing from finite block-
length results.IEEE Transactions on Information Theory, 63(9):5923–
5933, 2017.doi:10.1109/TIT.2017.2697358.
[170] O. T. Johnson, M. Aldridge, and J. Scarlett. Performance of
group testing algorithms with near-constant tests-per-item.IEEE
Transactions on Information Theory, 65(2):707–723, 2019.doi:
10.1109/TIT.2018.2861772.
[171] J. S.-T. Juan and G. J. Chang. Adaptive group testing for consec-
utive positives.Discrete Mathematics, 308(7):1124–1129, 2008.doi:
10.1016/j.disc.2007.04.002.
172BIBLIOGRAPHY
[172] A. B. Kahng and S. Reda. New and improved bist diagnosis methods from
combinatorial group testing theory.IEEE Transactions on Computer-
Aided Design of Integrated Circuits and Systems, 25(3):533–543, 2006.
doi:10.1109/TCAD.2005.854635.
[173] R. M. Kainkaryam and P. J. Woolf. Pooling in high-throughput
drug screening.Current Opinion on Drug Discovery and Develop-
ment, 12(3):339, 2009.url:https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/
19396735.
[174] E. Karimi, A. Heidarzadeh, K. R. Narayanan, and A. Sprintson. Noisy
group testing with side information. InAsilomar Conference on Signals,
Systems, and Computers, pages 867–871. IEEE, 2022.url:10.1109/
IEEECONF56349.2022.10052078.
[175] R. M. Karp.Reducibility among combinatorial problems, pages 85–103.
Springer, 1972.doi:10.1007/978-1-4684-2001-2_9.
[176] Y. Kaspi, O. Shayevitz, and T. Javidi. Searching for multiple tar-
gets with measurement dependent noise. InIEEE International Sym-
posium on Information Theory (ISIT), pages 969–973, 2015.doi:
10.1109/ISIT.2015.7282599.
[177] C. R. Katholi, L. To´ e, A. Merriweather, and T. R. Unnasch. De-
termining the prevalence ofonchocerca volvulusinfection in vector
populations by polymerase chain reaction screening of pools of black
flies.Journal of Infectious Diseases, 172(5):1414–1417, 1995.doi:
10.1093/infdis/172.5.1414.
[178] G. O. H. Katona. Combinatorial search problems. In J. N. Srivastava,
editor,A Survey of Combinatorial Theory, pages 285–308. North-Holland,
1973.doi:10.1016/B978-0-7204-2262-7.50028-4.
[179] W. Kautz and R. Singleton. Nonrandom binary superimposed codes.
IEEE Transactions on Information Theory, 10(4):363–377, 1964.doi:
10.1109/TIT.1964.1053689.
[180] T. Kealy, O. Johnson, and R. Piechocki. The capacity of non-
identical adaptive group testing. InAnnual Allerton Conference on
Communication, Control, and Computing, pages 101–108, 2014.doi:
10.1109/ALLERTON.2014.7028442.
[181] S. A. Khan, P. Chowdhury, P. Choudhury, and P. Dutta. Detection of
west nile virus in six mosquito species in synchrony with seroconversion
among sentinel chickens in India.Parasites and Vectors, 10(1):13, 2017.
doi:10.1186/s13071-016-1948-9.
[182] S. Khattab, S. Gobriel, R. Melhem, and D. Mosse. Live baiting
for service-level DoS attackers. InIEEE International Conference on
Computer Communications (INFOCOM), pages 171–175, 2008.doi:
10.1109/INFOCOM.2008.43.
BIBLIOGRAPHY173
[183] E. Knill, A. Schliep, and D. Torney. Interpretation of pooling experiments
using the Markov chain Monte Carlo method.Journal of Computational
Biology, 3:395–406, 1996.doi:10.1089/cmb.1996.3.395.
[184] J. Komlos and A. Greenberg. An asymptotically fast nonadaptive
algorithm for conflict resolution in multiple-access channels.IEEE
Transactions on Information Theory, 31(2):302–306, 1985.doi:
10.1109/TIT.1985.1057020.
[185] T. Laarhoven. Asymptotics of fingerprinting and group testing:
Tight bounds from channel capacities.IEEE Transactions on In-
formation Forensics and Security, 10(9):1967–1980, 2015.doi:
10.1109/TIFS.2015.2440190.
[186] I. Lau, J. Scarlett, and Y. Sun. Model-based and graph-based priors for
group testing.IEEE Transactions on Signal Processing, 70:6035–6050,
2022.doi:10.1109/TSP.2022.3229942.
[187] K. Lee, K. Chandrasekher, R. Pedarsani, and K. Ramchandran. SAF-
FRON: A fast, efficient, and robust framework for group testing
based on sparse-graph codes.IEEE Transactions on Signal Processing,
67(17):4649–4664, 2019.doi:10.1109/TSP.2019.2929938.
[188] C. H. Li. A sequential method for screening experimental variables.Jour-
nal of the American Statistical Association, 57(298):455–477, 1962.doi:
10.1080/01621459.1962.10480672.
[189] T. Li, C. L. Chan, W. Huang, T. Kaced, and S. Jaggi. Group testing with
prior statistics. InIEEE International Symposium on Information Theory
(ISIT), pages 2346–2350, 2014.doi:10.1109/ISIT.2014.6875253.
[190] X. Li and A. Mazumdar. Noisy nonadaptive group testing with bi-
nary splitting: New test design and improvement on Price-Scarlett-Tan’s
scheme. InIEEE International Symposium on Information Theory (ISIT),
2025.doi:10.1109/ISIT63088.2025.11195538.
[191] X. Li, S. Pawar, and K. Ramchandran. Sub-linear time compressed
sensing using sparse-graph codes. InIEEE International Sympo-
sium on Information Theory (ISIT), pages 1645–1649, 2015.doi:
10.1109/ISIT.2015.7282735.
[192] Y.-H. Li, R. Gabrys, J. Sima, I. Shomorony, and O. Milenkovic. Find-
ing a burst of positives via nonadaptive semiquantitative group testing.
InIEEE International Symposium on Information Theory (ISIT), pages
1848–1853, 2023.doi:10.1109/ISIT54713.2023.10206886.
[193] Y.-H. Li and I.-H. Wang. Non-adaptive combinatorial quantitative
group testing with adversarially perturbed measurements, 2022, arXiv:
2101.12653.
[194] Z. Li, M. Fresacher, and J. Scarlett. Learning Erd˝ os–R´ enyi random graphs
via edge detecting queries.Advances in Neural Information Processing
Systems, 32, 2019.url:https://dl.acm.org/doi/10.5555/3454287.
3454324.
174BIBLIOGRAPHY
[195] W. Liang and J. Zou. Neural group testing to accelerate deep learning.
InIEEE International Symposium on Information Theory (ISIT), pages
958–963, 2021.doi:10.1109/ISIT45174.2021.9518038.
[196] B. Lindstr¨ om. On a combinatory detection problem I.A Magyar Tu-
dom´ anyos Akad´ emia Matematikai Kutat´ o Int´ ezet´ enek K¨ ozlem´ enyei, 9(1–
2):195–207, 1964.url:https://real-j.mtak.hu/515/.
[197] B. Lindstr¨ om. On a combinatorial problem in number the-
ory.Canadian Mathematical Bulletin, 8(4):477–490, 1965.doi:
10.4153/CMB-1965-034-2.
[198] B. Lindstr¨ om. Determining subsets by unramified experiments. In J. N.
Srivastava, editor,A Survey of Statistical Designs and Linear Models,
pages 407–418. North-Holland, 1975.
[199] C. Lo, M. Liu, J. P. Lynch, and A. C. Gilbert. Efficient sensor fault detec-
tion using combinatorial group testing. InIEEE International Conference
on Distributed Computing in Sensor Systems (DCOSS), pages 199–206,
2013.doi:10.1109/DCOSS.2013.57.
[200] M. Lovig and I. Zadik. On the MCMC performance in Bernoulli group
testing and the random max set-cover problem, 2024, arXiv:2410.09231.
[201] J. Luo and D. Guo. Neighbor discovery in wireless ad hoc net-
works based on group testing. InAnnual Allerton Conference on
Communication, Control, and Computing, pages 791–797, 2008.doi:
10.1109/ALLERTON.2008.4797638.
[202] L. Ma, T. He, A. Swami, D. Towsley, K. K. Leung, and J. Lowe. Node
failure localization via network tomography. InProceedings of the 2014
Conference on Internet Measurement Conference (IMC), pages 195–208,
2014.doi:10.1145/2663716.2663723.
[203] D. J. C. MacKay.Information Theory, Inference and Learning Algorithms.
Cambridge University Press, 2003.doi:10.2277/0521642981.
[204] A. J. Macula. Probabilistic nonadaptive and two-stage group testing with
relatively small pools and DNA library screening.Journal of Combinato-
rial Optimization, 2(4):385–397, 1998.doi:10.1023/A:1009732820981.
[205] A. J. Macula. Probabilistic nonadaptive group testing in the presence of
errors and DNA library screening.Annals of Combinatorics, 3(1):61–69,
1999.doi:10.1007/BF01609876.
[206] A. J. Macula and L. J. Popyack. A group testing method for finding
patterns in data.Discrete Applied Mathematics, 144(1):149–157, 2004.
doi:10.1016/j.dam.2003.07.009.
[207] T. Madej. An application of group testing to the file comparison problem.
InInternational Conference on Distributed Computing Systems, pages
237–243, 1989.doi:10.1109/ICDCS.1989.37952.
BIBLIOGRAPHY175
[208] D. M. Malioutov and M. Malyutov. Boolean compressed sensing: LP
relaxation for group testing. InIEEE International Conference on Acous-
tics, Speech and Signal Processing (ICASSP), pages 3305–3308, 2012.doi:
10.1109/ICASSP.2012.6288622.
[209] D. M. Malioutov and K. R. Varshney. Exact rule learning via Boolean
compressed sensing. InInternational Conference on Machine Learn-
ing, pages 765–773, 2013.url:http://proceedings.mlr.press/v28/
malioutov13.html.
[210] D. M. Malioutov, K. R. Varshney, A. Emad, and S. Dash. Learning
interpretable classification rules with Boolean compressed sensing. In
T. Cerquitelli, D. Quercia, and F. Pasquale, editors,Transparent Data
Mining for Big and Small Data, pages 95–121. Springer, 2017.doi:
10.1007/978-3-319-54024-5_5.
[211] M. Malyutov and H. Sadaka. Maximization of ESI. Jaynes principle in
testing significant inputs of linear model.Random Operators and Stochas-
tic Equations, 6(4):311–330, 1998.doi:10.1515/rose.1998.6.4.311.
[212] M. B. Malyutov. The separating property of random matrices.Matem-
aticheskie Zametki, 23(1):155–167, 1978.doi:10.1007/BF01104893.
Translation:Mathematical Notes of the Academy of Sciences of the USSR.
23(1):84–91.
[213] M. B. Malyutov. Search for sparse active inputs: A review. In H. Ay-
dinian, F. Cicalese, and C. Deppe, editors,Information Theory, Combina-
torics, and Search Theory: In Memory of Rudolf Ahlswede, pages 609–647.
Springer, 2013.doi:10.1007/978-3-642-36899-8_31.
[214] M. B. Malyutov and P. S. Mateev. Planning of screening experiments for
a nonsymmetric response function.Matematicheskie Zametki, 27:109–127,
1980.doi:10.1007/BF01149816. Translation:Mathematical Notes of the
Academy of Sciences of the USSR. 27(1):57–68.
[215] A. Mazumdar. Nonadaptive group testing with random set of defectives.
IEEE Transactions on Information Theory, 62(12):7522–7531, 2016.doi:
10.1109/TIT.2016.2613870.
[216] C. McDiarmid. On the method of bounded differences. In J. Siemons, edi-
tor,Surveys in Combinatorics 1989: Invited Papers at the Twelfth British
Combinatorial Conference, pages 148–188. Cambridge University Press,
1989.doi:10.1017/CBO9781107359949.008.
[217] D. McMorrow and J. Scarlett. Optimal non-adaptive group testing with
one-sided error guarantees, 2025, arXiv:2506.10374.
[218] M. M´ ezard, M. Tarzia, and C. Toninelli. Group testing with random pools:
Phase transitions and optimal strategy.Journal of Statistical Physics,
131(5):783–801, 2008.doi:10.1007/s10955-008-9528-9.
[219] M. M´ ezard and C. Toninelli. Group testing with random pools: Opti-
mal two-stage algorithms.IEEE Transactions on Information Theory,
57(3):1736–1745, 2011.doi:10.1109/TIT.2010.2103752.
176BIBLIOGRAPHY
[220] R. Morjaria, S. Bulusu, V. Gandikota, and S. Jaggi. Density-dependent
group testing. InInternational Conference on Artificial Intelligence
and Statistics (AISTATS), pages 3628–3636, 2025.url:https://
proceedings.mlr.press/v258/morjaria25a.html.
[221] E. Mossel, R. O’Donnell, and R. A. Servedio. Learning functions ofk
relevant variables.Journal of Computer and System Sciences, 69(3):421–
434, 2004.doi:10.1016/j.jcss.2004.04.002.
[222] R. Mourad, Z. Dawy, and F. Morcos. Designing pooling systems
for noisy high-throughput protein-protein interaction experiments us-
ing Boolean compressed sensing.IEEE/ACM Transactions on Com-
putational Biology and Bioinformatics, 10(6):1478–1490, 2013.doi:
10.1109/TCBB.2013.129.
[223] L. Mutesa, P. Ndishimye, Y. Butera, J. Souopgui, A. Uwineza, R. Rutay-
isire, E. L. Ndoricimpaye, E. Musoni, N. Rujeni, T. Nyatanyi, E. Ntag-
wabira, M. Semakula, C. Musanabaganwa, D. Nyamwasa, M. Ndashimye,
E. Ujeneza, I. E. Mwikarago, C. M. Muvunyi, J. B. Mazarati, S. Nsanz-
imana, N. Turok, and W. Ndifon. A pooled testing strategy for identi-
fying SARS-CoV-2 at low prevalence.Nature, 589:276–280, 2020.doi:
10.1038/s41586-020-2885-5.
[224] E. Nebenzahl and M. Sobel. Finite and infinite models for generalized
group-testing with unequal probabilities of success for each item. InDis-
criminant Analysis and Applications, pages 239–289. Elsevier, 1973.doi:
10.1016/B978-0-12-154050-0.50020-4.
[225] H. Q. Ngo, E. Porat, and A. Rudra. Efficiently decodable error-correcting
list disjunct matrices and applications. InInternational Colloquium on
Automata, Languages and Programming (ICALP), pages 557–568, 2011.
doi:10.1007/978-3-642-22006-7_47.
[226] P. Nikolopoulos, S. R. Srinivasavaradhan, T. Guo, C. Fragouli,
and S. N. Diggavi. Community-aware group testing.IEEE
Transactions on Information Theory, 69(7):4361–4383, 2023.doi:
10.1109/TIT.2023.3250119.
[227] H. Nikpey, S. Sarkar, and S. S. Bidokhti. Group testing with gen-
eral correlation using hypergraphs. InIEEE International Sympo-
sium on Information Theory (ISIT), pages 3225–3230, 2024.doi:
10.1109/ISIT57864.2024.10619244.
[228] J. Niles-Weed and I. Zadik. It was “all” for “nothing”: Sharp phase tran-
sitions for noiseless discrete channels.IEEE Transactions on Information
Theory, 69(8):5188–5202, 2023.doi:10.1109/TIT.2022.3225802.
[229] V. Paligadu, O. Johnson, and M. Aldridge. Small error algorithms for
tropical group testing, 2024.doi:10.1109/TIT.2024.3445271.
[230] Y. Polyanskiy, H. V. Poor, and S. Verd´ u. Channel coding rate in the
finite blocklength regime.IEEE Transactions on Information Theory,
56(5):2307–2359, 2010.doi:10.1109/TIT.2010.2043769.
BIBLIOGRAPHY177
[231] E. Porat and A. Rothschild. Explicit nonadaptive combinatorial group
testing schemes.IEEE Transactions on Information Theory, 57(12):7982–
7989, 2011.doi:10.1109/TIT.2011.2163296.
[232] E. Price and J. Scarlett. A fast binary splitting approach
to non-adaptive group testing. InInternational Conference
on Randomization and Computation (RANDOM), 2020.doi:
10.4230/LIPIcs.APPROX/RANDOM.2020.13.
[233] E. Price, J. Scarlett, and N. Tan. Fast splitting algorithms for sparsity-
constrained and noisy group testing.Information and Inference: A Jour-
nal of the IMA, 12(2):1141–1171, 2023.doi:10.1093/imaiai/iaac031.
[234] L. Riccio and C. J. Colbourn. Sharper bounds in adaptive group test-
ing.Taiwanese Journal of Mathematics, 4(4):669–673, 2000.doi:
10.11650/twjm/1500407300.
[235] T. Richardson and R. Urbanke.Modern Coding Theory. Cambridge Uni-
versity Press, 2008.doi:10.1017/CBO9780511791338.
[236] M. Ruszink´ o. On the upper bound of the size of ther-cover-free families.
Journal of Combinatorial Theory, Series A, 66(2):302–310, 1994.doi:
10.1016/0097-3165(94)90067-1.
[237] M. H. Sak, R. Y. Liu, E. E. Kwan, and E. N. Jacobsen. Accelerat-
ing the discovery of multicatalytic cooperativity.Nature, 2025.doi:
10.1038/s41586-025-09813-2.
[238] J. Scarlett. An efficient algorithm for capacity-approaching noisy adaptive
group testing. InIEEE International Symposium on Information Theory
(ISIT), 2019.doi:10.1109/ISIT.2019.8849310.
[239] J. Scarlett. Noisy adaptive group testing: Bounds and algorithms.
IEEE Transactions on Information Theory, 65(6):3646–3661, 2019.doi:
10.1109/TIT.2018.2883604.
[240] J. Scarlett and V. Cevher. Converse bounds for noisy group test-
ing with arbitrary measurement matrices. InIEEE International Sym-
posium on Information Theory (ISIT), pages 2868–2872, 2016.doi:
10.1109/ISIT.2016.7541823.
[241] J. Scarlett and V. Cevher. Phase transitions in group testing. InACM-
SIAM Symposium on Discrete Algorithms (SODA), pages 40–53, 2016.
doi:10.1137/1.9781611974331.ch4.
[242] J. Scarlett and V. Cevher. How little does non-exact recovery help
in group testing? InIEEE International Conference on Acoustics,
Speech and Signal Processing (ICASSP), pages 6090–6094, 2017.doi:
10.1109/ICASSP.2017.7953326.
[243] J. Scarlett and V. Cevher. Limits on support recovery with
probabilistic models: An information-theoretic framework.IEEE
Transactions on Information Theory, 63(1):593–620, 2017.doi:
10.1109/TIT.2016.2606605.
178BIBLIOGRAPHY
[244] J. Scarlett and V. Cevher. Phase transitions in the pooled data problem.
InAdvances in Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS), pages
377–385, 2017.url:https://dl.acm.org/doi/10.5555/3294771.
3294807.
[245] J. Scarlett and V. Cevher. Near-optimal noisy group testing via separate
decoding of items.IEEE Journal of Selelected Topics in Signal Processing,
2(4):625–638, 2018.doi:10.1109/JSTSP.2018.2844818.
[246] J. Scarlett and O. Johnson. Noisy non-adaptive group testing: A (near-
)definite defectives approach.IEEE Transactions on Information Theory,
66(6):3775–3797, 2020.doi:10.1109/TIT.2020.2970184.
[247] A. Schliep, D. C. Torney, and S. Rahmann. Group testing with DNA chips:
Generating designs and decoding experiments. InIEEE Bioinformatics
Conference, pages 84–91, 2003.doi:10.1109/CSB.2003.1227307.
[248] A. Seb˝ o. On two random search problems.Journal of Statistical Planning
and Inference, 11(1):23–31, 1985.doi:10.1016/0378-3758(85)90022-9.
[249] D. Sejdinovic and O. T. Johnson. Note on noisy group testing: Asymp-
totic bounds and belief propagation reconstruction. InAnnual Allerton
Conference on Communication, Control, and Computing, pages 998–1003,
2010.doi:10.1109/ALLERTON.2010.5707018.
[250] P. Sham, J. S. Bader, I. Craig, M. O’Donovan, and M. Owen. DNA pool-
ing: A tool for large-scale association studies.Nature Reviews Genetics,
3(11):862–871, 2002.doi:10.1038/nrg930.
[251] C. Shangguan and G. Ge. New bounds on the number of tests for disjunct
matrices.IEEE Transactions on Information Theory, 62(12):7518–7521,
2016.doi:10.1109/TIT.2016.2614726.
[252] C. Shannon. The zero error capacity of a noisy channel.
IRE Transactions on Information Theory, 2(3):8–19, 1956.doi:
10.1109/TIT.1956.1056798.
[253] C. E. Shannon. Certain results in coding theory for noisy
channels.Information and Control, 1(1):6–25, 1957.doi:
10.1016/S0019-9958(57)90039-6.
[254] A. Sharma and C. R. Murthy. Group testing-based spectrum hole
search for cognitive radios.IEEE Transactions on Vehicular Technology,
63(8):3794–3805, 2014.doi:10.1109/TVT.2014.2305978.
[255] N. Shental, A. Amir, and O. Zuk. Identification of rare alleles and
their carriers using compressed se(que)nsing.Nucleic Acids Research,
38(19):e179, 2010.doi:10.1093/nar/gkq675.
[256] M. Shi, T. Furon, and H. J´ egou. A group testing framework for similarity
search in high-dimensional spaces. InACM International Conference on
Multimedia, pages 407–416, 2014.doi:10.1145/2647868.2654895.
[257] M. Sobel and R. Elashoff. Group testing with a new goal, estimation.
Biometrika, pages 181–193, 1975.doi:10.2307/2334502.
BIBLIOGRAPHY179
[258] M. Sobel and P. A. Groll. Group testing to eliminate efficiently all defec-
tives in a binomial sample.Bell Labs Technical Journal, 38(5):1179–1252,
1959.doi:10.1002/j.1538-7305.1959.tb03914.x.
[259] M. Sobel and P. A. Groll. Binomial group-testing with an unknown
proportion of defectives.Technometrics, 8(4):631–656, 1966.doi:
10.1080/00401706.1966.10490408.
[260] M. Soleymani and T. Javidi. A non-adaptive algorithm for the quan-
titative group testing problem. InConference on Learning Theory,
pages 4574–4592, 2024.url:https://proceedings.mlr.press/v247/
soleymani24a.html.
[261] M. Soleymani and T. Javidi. Learning to ask: Decision transformers for
adaptive quantitative group testing, 2025, arXiv:2509.01723.
[262] D. A. Spielman. Linear-time encodable and decodable error-correcting
codes.IEEE Transactions on Information Theory, 42(6):1723–1731, 1996.
doi:10.1109/18.556668.
[263] M. R. Stan, P. D. Franzon, S. C. Goldstein, J. C. Lach, and M. M.
Ziegler. Molecular electronics: From devices and interconnect to circuits
and architecture.Proceedings of the IEEE, 91(11):1940–1957, 2003.doi:
10.1109/JPROC.2003.818327.
[264] A. Sterrett. On the detection of defective members of large popula-
tions.The Annals of Mathematical Statistics, 28(4):1033–1036, 1957.doi:
10.1214/aoms/1177706807.
[265] W. H. Swallow. Group testing for estimating infection rates and proba-
bilities of disease transmission.Phytopathology, 75(8):882–889, 1985.doi:
10.1094/Phyto-75-882.
[266] N. Tan, P. P. Cobo, and R. Venkataramanan. Quantitative group testing
and pooled data in the linear regime with sublinear tests.IEEE Transac-
tions on Information Theory, 2025.doi:10.1109/TIT.2025.3611276.
[267] N. Tan, P. Pascual Cobo, J. Scarlett, and R. Venkataramanan. Approxi-
mate message passing with rigorous guarantees for pooled data and quan-
titative group testing.SIAM Journal on Mathematics of Data Science,
6(4):1027–1054, 2024.doi:10.1137/23M1604928.
[268] N. Tan, W. Tan, and J. Scarlett. Performance bounds for group testing
with doubly-regular designs.IEEE Transactions on Information Theory,
69(2):1224–1243, 2022.doi:10.1109/TIT.2022.3210593.
[269] B. Teo and J. Scarlett. Noisy adaptive group testing via noisy binary
search.IEEE Transactions on Information Theory, 68(5):3340–3353,
2022.doi:10.1109/TIT.2022.3140604.
[270] K. H. Thompson. Estimation of the proportion of vectors in a nat-
ural population of insects.Biometrics, 18(4):568–578, 1962.doi:
10.2307/2527902.
180BIBLIOGRAPHY
[271] M. Tilghman, D. Tsai, T. P. Buene, M. Tomas, S. Amade, D. Gehlbach,
S. Chang, C. Ignacio, G. Caballero, S. Espitia, S. May, E. V. Noorma-
homed, and D. Smith. Pooled nucleic acid testing to detect antiretro-
viral treatment failure in HIV-infected patients in Mozambique.Jour-
nal of Acquired Immune Deficiency Syndromes, 70(3):256, 2015.doi:
10.1097/QAI.0000000000000724.
[272] D. C. Torney. Sets pooling designs.Annals of Combinatorics, 3(1):95–101,
1999.doi:doi.org/10.1007/BF01609879.
[273] L. V. Truong, M. Aldridge, and J. Scarlett. On the all-or-nothing behavior
of Bernoulli group testing.IEEE Journal on Selected Areas in Information
Theory, 1(3):669–680, 2020.doi:10.1109/JSAIT.2020.3039790.
[274] M. A. Tsfasman, S. G. Vl˘ adut, and T. Zink. Modular curves,
Shimura curves, and Goppa codes, better than Varshamov-Gilbert
bound.Mathematische Nachrichten, 109(1):21–28, 1982.doi:
10.1002/mana.19821090103.
[275] X. M. Tu, E. Litvak, and M. Pagano. On the informativeness and accuracy
of pooled testing in estimating prevalence of a rare disease: Application to
HIV screening.Biometrika, pages 287–297, 1995.doi:10.2307/2337408.
[276] S. Ubaru, S. Dash, A. Mazumdar, and O. Gunluk. Multilabel classifica-
tion by hierarchical partitioning and data-dependent grouping.Advances
in Neural Information Processing Systems, 33:22542–22553, 2020.url:
https://dl.acm.org/doi/10.5555/3495724.3497614.
[277] S. Ubaru and A. Mazumdar. Multilabel classification with group testing
and codes. InInternational Conference on Machine Learning, volume 70,
pages 3492–3501, 2017.url:https://proceedings.mlr.press/v70/
ubaru17a.html.
[278] M. K. Varanasi. Group detection for synchronous Gaussian code-division
multiple-access channels.IEEE Transactions on Information Theory,
41(4):1083–1096, 1995.doi:10.1109/18.391251.
[279] V. V. Vazirani.Approximation Algorithms. Springer, 2001.doi:
10.1007/978-3-662-04565-7.
[280] T. Wadayama. Nonadaptive group testing based on sparse pooling graphs.
IEEE Transactions on Information Theory, 63(3):1525–1534, 2017.doi:
10.1109/TIT.2016.2621112. See also [281].
[281] T. Wadayama. Comments on ‘nonadaptive group testing based on sparse
pooling graphs’.IEEE Transactions on Information Theory, 64(6):4686–
4686, 2018.doi:10.1109/TIT.2018.2827463.
[282] S. D. Walter, S. W. Hildreth, and B. J. Beaty. Estimation of
infection rates in populations of organisms using pools of variable
size.American Journal of Epidemiology, 112(1):124–128, 1980.doi:
10.1093/oxfordjournals.aje.a112961.
BIBLIOGRAPHY181
[283] C. Wang, Q. Zhao, and C.-N. Chuah. Optimal nested test plan for com-
binatorial quantitative group testing.IEEE Transactions on Signal Pro-
cessing, 66(4):992–1006, 2018.doi:10.1109/TSP.2017.2780053.
[284] H.-P. Wang, R. Gabrys, and V. Guruswami. Quickly-decodable group test-
ing with fewer tests: Price–Scarlett’s nonadaptive splitting with explicit
scalars. InIEEE International Symposium on Information Theory (ISIT),
pages 1609–1614, 2023.doi:10.1109/ISIT54713.2023.10206843.
[285] H.-P. Wang, R. Gabrys, and A. Vardy. Tropical group testing.IEEE
Transactions on Information Theory, 69(9):6098–6120, 2023.url:10.
1109/TIT.2023.3282847.
[286] H.-P. Wang and V. Guruswami. Isolate and then identify: Re-
thinking adaptive group testing. InIEEE International Sympo-
sium on Information Theory (ISIT), pages 3231–3236, 2024.doi:
10.1109/ISIT57864.2024.10619098.
[287] I.-H. Wang, S.-L. Huang, K.-Y. Lee, and K.-C. Chen. Data extraction
via histogram and arithmetic mean queries: Fundamental limits and algo-
rithms. InIEEE International Symposium on Information Theory (ISIT),
pages 1386–1390, 2016.doi:10.1109/ISIT.2016.7541526.
[288] J. Wang, E. Lo, and M. L. Yiu. Identifying the most connected ver-
tices in hidden bipartite graphs using group testing.IEEE Transac-
tions on Knowledge and Data Engineering, 25(10):2245–2256, 2013.doi:
10.1109/TKDE.2012.178.
[289] L. Wang, X. Li, Y.-Q. Zhang, Y. Zhang, and K. Zhang. Evolution of
scaling emergence in large-scale spatial epidemic spreading.PLoS ONE,
6(7):e21197, 2011.doi:10.1371/journal.pone.0021197.
[290] J. K. Wolf. Born again group testing: Multiaccess communications.
IEEE Transactions on Information Theory, 31(2):185–191, 1985.doi:
10.1109/TIT.1985.1057026.
[291] S. Wu, S. Wei, Y. Wang, R. Vaidyanathan, and J. Yuan. Achievable parti-
tion information rate over noisy multi-access Boolean channel. InIEEE In-
ternational Symposium on Information Theory (ISIT), pages 1206–1210,
2014.doi:10.1109/ISIT.2014.6875024.
[292] S. Wu, S. Wei, Y. Wang, R. Vaidyanathan, and J. Yuan. Partition
information and its transmission over Boolean multi-access channels.
IEEE Transactions on Information Theory, 61(2):1010–1027, 2015.doi:
10.1109/TIT.2014.2375211.
[293] M. Xhemrishi, J. ¨Ostman, A. Wachter-Zeh, and A. Graell i Amat. FedGT:
Identification of malicious clients in federated learning with secure ag-
gregation.IEEE Transactions on Information Forensics and Security,
20:2577–2592, 2025.doi:10.1109/TIFS.2025.3539964.
[294] W. Xu, M. Wang, E. Mallada, and A. Tang. Recent results on sparse
recovery over graphs. InAsilomar Conference on Signals, Systems and
Computers, pages 413–417, 2011.doi:10.1109/ACSSC.2011.6190031.
182BIBLIOGRAPHY
[295] Y. Xuan, I. Shin, M. T. Thai, and T. Znati. Detecting application
denial-of-service attacks: A group-testing-based approach.IEEE Trans-
actions on Parallel and Distributed Systems, 21(8):1203–1216, 2010.doi:
10.1109/TPDS.2009.147.
[296] N. Zaman and N. Pippenger. Asymptotic analysis of optimal nested group-
testing procedures.Probability in the Engineering and Informational Sci-
ences, 30(4):547–552, 2016.doi:10.1017/S0269964816000267.
[297] W. Zhang and L. Huang. On or many-access channels. InIEEE Interna-
tional Symposium on Information Theory (ISIT), pages 2638–2642, 2017.
doi:10.1109/ISIT.2017.8007007.
[298] L. Zhou and A. O. Hero. Twenty questions with random error.Founda-
tions and Trends in Communications and Information Theory, 22(4):394–
604, 2025.doi:10.1561/0100000144.