Near-optimal Batch Mode Active Learning
and Adaptive Submodular Optimization
Yuxin Chen yuxin.chen@inf.ethz.ch
Andreas Krause krausea@ethz.ch
ETH Zurich, Universit¨ atstrasse 6, 8092 Z¨ urich, Switzerland
Abstract
Active learning can lead to a dramatic
reduction in labeling eﬀort. However, in
many practical implementations (such as
crowdsourcing, surveys, high-throughput
experimental design), it is preferable to query
labels for batches of examples to be labelled
in parallel. While several heuristics have been
proposed for batch-mode active learning, little
is known about their theoretical performance.
We consider batch mode active learning and
more general information-parallel stochastic
optimization problems that exhibit adaptive
submodularity, a natural diminishing returns
condition. We prove that for such problems,
a simple greedy strategy is competitive
with the optimal batch-mode policy. In
some cases, surprisingly, the use of batches
incurs competitively low cost, even when
compared to a fully sequential strategy. We
demonstrate the eﬀectiveness of our approach
on batch-mode active learning tasks, where
it outperforms the state of the art, as well
as the novel problem of multi-stage inﬂuence
maximization in social networks.
1. Introduction
Active learning, i.e., sequential selection of unlabeled
examples for labeling, can lead to dramatic (potentially
exponential) reduction in labeling eﬀort as compared to
passive learning. In many practical settings, however,
fully sequential selection, where the choice of the next
example depends on all previous labels, is infeasible.
For example, when recruiting workers on Amazon
Mechanical Turk for crowdsourcing annotation, one
Proceedings of the 30 th International Conference on
Machine Learning, Atlanta, Georgia, USA, 2013. JMLR:
W&CP volume 28. Copyright 2013 by the author(s).
usually generates tasks comprising several unlabeled
examples. Similarly, in high-throughput experimental
design, it is often more cost-eﬀective to perform several
experiments in parallel. Such problems have been stud-
ied from the perspective of batch-mode active learning.
While several heuristics have been proposed, little
is known about their theoretical performance. More
generally, in many sequential decision problems, we
would like to choose multiple actions to be performed
in parallel, and receive feedback only after all actions
have been carried out. This feedback then informs the
next batch of actions. For example, consider a viral
marketing problem (Kempe et al., 2003), where we
wish to spur demand for a new product by inﬂuencing
a set of nodes in a social network. In such a setting it is
natural to conduct a multi-stage marketing campaign,
where each stage is informed by the observed eﬀec-
tiveness of the previous stage. Similar problems arise
in resource allocation in computational sustainability
(Golovin et al., 2011), and vaccination problems in
epidemiology (Anshelevich et al., 2009).
In this paper, we study information-parallel learning
and decision making . In particular, we tackle batch-
mode active learning and more general stochastic
optimization problems, such as inﬂuence maximization
in social networks, that exhibit adaptive submodularity
(Golovin & Krause, 2011), a natural diminishing
returns condition. We prove that, for such problems,
a simple BatchGreedy approach, which greedily
selects examples within a batch, and assembles batches
in a greedy manner, is competitive with the optimal
batch-mode policy. Furthermore, we prove that
surprisingly, in some natural settings, the price of
parallelism is bounded: the use of batches incurs
competitively low cost irrespective of the batch size,
even when compared to a fully sequential policy. We
demonstrate the eﬀectiveness of our approach on
active learning tasks, as well as adaptive inﬂuence
maximization in social networks. Our approach is the
ﬁrst to provide both strong guarantees and compelling

Near-optimal Batch Mode Active Learning and Adaptive Submodular Optimization
empirical performance for the important practical
problem of batch mode active learning, where Batch-
Greedy improves on random selection by≈ 48% more
than the state of the art does on our test sets.
In summary, our main contributions are:
• We consider a general approach for information
parallel learning and decision making,
• prove strong performance guarantees for a simple
BatchGreedy algorithm,
• provide practical algorithms for batch-mode active
learning and inﬂuence maximization, and
• demonstrate the empirical eﬀectiveness of the
algorithms for both applications.
2. Problem Statement and Applications
We ﬁrst describe two diﬀerent applications that moti-
vate our research. Then, in Section 2.2 we introduce a
formalism that captures both of them, and then prove
results for this more general model in Section 3.
2.1. Motivating applications
Pool-based batch mode active learning Con-
sider a simple model of pool-based Bayesian active
learning. We are given a poolV of unlabeled examples
x1,..., xn. We use y1,...,y n∈{ +1,−1}, where yi is
the (initially unknown) label1 of example xi. Our goal
is to learn a classiﬁer h :V→{ +1,−1} out of a ﬁnite
setH of hypotheses, each corresponding to distinct la-
belings of the poolV, and containing the true labeling,
i.e., a hypothesish such thath(xi) = yi for 1≤i≤n.
For now let us assume that we have a uniform prior
P (h) = 1
|H| over the hypotheses. We later show that
our results also hold for more general priors, as well as
for the prior-free (non-Bayesian) setting.
Suppose we have already observed the labels yA
for a subset A ⊆ V of the pool. In this case,
some of the hypotheses h ∈ Hwill be inconsistent
with the observations yA, and we use the notation
H(yA) ={h∈H :i∈A⇒ yi =h(xi)} to refer to the
version space (set of hypotheses) consistent with the
observation yA. We wish to actively select a minimum
number of unlabeled examples and obtain their labels
yA, such that these allow us to uniquely identify h
(i.e., infer the labels of all unlabeled examples), so that
|H(yA)| = 1. An optimal active learning strategy is
one that minimizes the expected number of labels re-
quested, in expectation over our priorP (h). Similarly,
we can consider strategies for batch-mode active learn-
ing, which pick batches of k unlabeled examples at a
1Note that our approach naturally extends to≥ 2 labels.
time, then request all labels for the selected batch in par-
allel, and then proceed to pick the next batch given the
labels obtained so far. See Figure 1 for an illustration.
Finding such an optimal policy is a formidable task.
In fact, even representing an optimal batch policy may
require exponential space. In the following, we will
describe a general class of batch mode optimization
problems, and present a simple greedy algorithm that
is provably competitive with the optimal batch policy.
Multi-stage inﬂuence maximization in social
networks Suppose we would like to stimulate
demand for a novel product. The idea behind viral
marketing is to utilize the social network structure con-
necting the potential customers: By giving the product
to a subset of target people for free, these may inﬂuence
their friends, potentially creating a cascade of inﬂuence
motivating many more consumers to adopt the product.
This problem was formalized by Kempe et al. (2003),
who show that many natural models of inﬂuence
(such as the independent cascade, or linear threshold
models) can be modeled stochastically. Formally,
letV = {1,...,n } be the set of nodes in the social
network, and let Ys⊆V be the (random) set of nodes
eventually inﬂuenced if s is initially targeted. If a set
A of nodes is initially targeted, the eventual inﬂuence
is
⏐⏐⏐⋃
s∈AYs
⏐⏐⏐ with probability2P (YA) =∏
s∈AP (Ys).
Instead of committing to all target nodes in advance,
it is natural to consider conducting a multi-stage
advertising campaign: In each stage certain nodes are
targeted, then the eﬀect of the campaign is observed,
then the next target nodes are chosen, and so on.
Implementing such a procedure may be much more
practical if many nodes can be selected in each stage, to
be inﬂuenced in parallel. In the following, we propose
a simple greedy approach that is competitive not only
with the optimal multi-stage strategy but even with an
optimal fully sequential strategy.
2.2. General Problem Statement
We now formalize a class of interactive optimization
problems generalizing the two examples of Section 2.1.
Adaptive Submodular Optimization We wish
to adaptively select items A out of a ﬁnite set of n
items V = {1,...,n } (unlabeled examples; target
nodes). Each item s∈V is associated with a random
variableYs, taking values in a (ﬁnite) setO of outcomes
(labels; sets of nodes eventually inﬂuenced). We use
YV = [ Y1,...,Y n], to refer to the collection of all
2Here we focus on factorial priors. Dependencies can be
modeled as well (Golovin & Krause, 2011).

Near-optimal Batch Mode Active Learning and Adaptive Submodular Optimization
x2x3x4x5x6x7x8x1
--
x9x10x11x12
x2x3x4x5x6x7x8x1 x9x10x11x12
+
x2x3x4x5x6x7x8x1 x9x10x11x12
(a) 1-dimensional data
{x3,x6,x9}
{x1,x2} {x7,x8}{x4,x5}
{x10,x11,x12}
{+,+,+}
{ , ,+}{ ,+,+}
{ , , } (b) The policy tree
Figure 1. Illustration of batch mode ( k = 3) active learning, in the simple case of one-dimensional data and binary
threshold hypotheses. Figure 1(a) shows the unlabeled data (top row), ﬁrst batch selected for labeling (middle row), and
received labels, as well as second selected batch (bottom row). Figure 1(b) illustrates the decision tree representing the
BatchGreedy policy, with the branch taken for the example of Figure 1(a).
variables, and assume thatYV is distributed according
to a joint distribution P (YV). Whenever an item s is
selected, the corresponding variableYs =ys is revealed.
This information can be used to select subsequent items.
We model the value associated with a set of items A,
and corresponding observations yA⊆V× O by means
of an objective function3 f : 2V×O→ N. In our active
learning example, we can use f(yA) =|H|−|H (yA)|,
i.e., the number of the hypotheses eliminated through
the labeled examples yA. In our viral marketing
example, we choose f(yA) = |⋃
s∈Ays|, i.e., the
number of nodes eventually inﬂuenced. Furthermore,
letS⊆V× O be a set of observations. Note that while
technically yA andS do not denote the same objects
(S denotes a set of item/observation pairs, yA denotes
the observations corresponding the item setA), we will
sometimes use these notations interchangeably to refer
to observations. In both applications, f satisﬁes the
following natural four properties4:
1. Normalized: f(∅) = 0, i.e., we derive no utility
from knowing nothing.
2. Monotonic: WheneverS ⊆ S′ ⊆ V×O, then
f(S)≤f(S′) – adding labels never hurts.
3. Submodular: whenever S ⊆ S′ ⊆ V× O and
(j,y )∈V× O\S′, it holds thatf(S∪{ (j,y )})−
f(S)≥ f(S′∪{ (j,y )})−f(S′). Thus, adding a
label helps more if we have observed few labels so
far, and less if we have obtained many labels.
4. Adaptive submodular: Consider the conditional
expected marginal gain of item j w.r.t. to
observationsS⊆V× O,
∆f(j|S )=
∑
y
P (Yj =y|S )
[
f(S∪{ (j,y )})−f(S)
]
.
(2.1)
3Note that if f takes rational values, we can normalize
it to take integer values.
4As a discrete analog of convexity, in many ways
(adaptive) submodularity is a minimal assumption needed
to ensure (approximate) tractability.
Function f together with distribution P (YV)
is called adaptive submodular, if, whenever
S ⊆ S′ ⊆ V ×O and P (S′) > 0 we have
∆f(j|S )≥ ∆f(j|S′). Thus, the gain of item j,
in expectation over its unknown label, can never
increase as we gather more information.
Our goal will be to ﬁnd a policy π for selecting items
(and associated observations)yA, such that we achieve
a certain quota of value Q≥ 0, i.e., f(yA)≥ Q, while
at the same time minimizing the number of items A
used. In the active learning example, Q = |H|− 1:
achieving this quota is a necessary and suﬃcient con-
dition for identifying the true hypothesis. In inﬂuence
maximization, Q may be a certain fraction of the size
of the social network. In the following, w.l.o.g. 5, we
assumef(yV) =Q for all yV∈ supp(P ).
Formally, a policyπ : 2V×O→V is a partial mapping
from observations yA ⊆ V×O to the next item to
be picked (or to stop, if yA /∈ dom(π)). Therefore,
if the variables YV are in state YV = yV, the policy
obtains a set of observations, which is denoted as
S(π, yV) ⊆ V ×O. We deﬁne the expected and
worst-case cost of policyπ as
costac(π)= EyV [|S(π, yV)|] ; costwc(π)=max
yV
|S(π, yV)|
Our goal, is to ﬁnd, out of a set Π of candidate policies
a feasible policyπ∗ with minimum cost,
min
π∈Π
cost(π) s.t.f(S(π, yV))≥Q for all yV w.P (yV)>0.
Batch selection Based on this notation, we can
study how diﬀerent classes of policies compare in
terms of their cost. On the one extreme, we have
fully sequential policies Πseq, where the choice of each
item may depend on the labels of all previous items
selected. On the other extreme, we have constant, or
5Iff(yV)>Q , we replacef with the – still submodular
– functionfQ(yA) = min(f(yA),Q ).

Near-optimal Batch Mode Active Learning and Adaptive Submodular Optimization
non-adaptive policies Π const which commit to items
picked in advance, before making any observations.
However, fully sequential and constant policies are only
two extremes on a spectrum. We are interested in poli-
cies Π[k] that sequentially pick batches of size k. Any
policyπ∈ Π[k] starts selecting a ﬁxed setA1⊆V ofk
items. It then obtains all labels yA1. If f(yA1)≥Q, it
stops. Otherwise, if batchesA1,..., A𝓁−1 have already
been selected, it picks batchA𝓁⊆V ofk items, obtains
the labels, and stops iff(yA1∪···∪A𝓁)≥Q.
Obtaining an optimal batch policy is a formidable task:
There are
(n
k
)
batches of size k, and an optimal batch
policy assembles such batches into a decision tree of
possibly exponentially large branching factor. In the
following, we describe a simple greedy algorithm, and
prove that it implements a batch policy with cost com-
petitive to that of the optimal batch policy. Moreover,
we prove that under some additional conditions on
the distribution P (YV), the greedy algorithm is even
competitive with the optimal fully sequential policy.
3. Near-optimal Batch Selection:
Greedy Algorithms and Guarantees
We consider a simple, greedy approach towards con-
structing batch policies. This policy, BatchGreedy,
selects items within a batch in a greedy manner, then
receives observations for all items in the batch, then
selects the next batch in a greedy manner, conditional
on all observations made so far, and so on. An
important challenge in batch selection is the fact that
the value of items (e.g., unlabeled examples) selected
depends on observations (e.g., labels) obtained only
after the entire batch is selected. In active learning
for example, one wishes to select examples within a
batch that are likely to be informative individually, but
also diverse (minimize redundancy). BatchGreedy
addresses this challenge by using a suitable notion of
marginal beneﬁt of an item, that takes into account
all observations made so far, as well as items that have
already been selected within the batch (but no obser-
vation has been obtained yet). Formally, we generalize
the conditional marginal beneﬁt (2.1) of items by
∆f(s|A, yB) = EyV
[
f(y{s}∪A∪B)−f(yA∪B)| yB
]
.
(3.1)
Thus, ∆f(s | A, yB) reﬂects the expected marginal
gain of item s, when items B have been selected and
the corresponding observations yB have been made,
and itemsA have already been selected, but no obser-
vations have yet been made about them. Therefore,
(3.1) captures possible redundancy (diminishing gains)
of candidate item s w.r.t. to labels already obtained,
as well as labels that will likely be obtained within the
Algorithm 1 The BatchGreedy algorithm.
Input: QuotaQ. Objective f and priorP (yV)
yB←∅
repeat
A←∅
fori = 1 tok do
s← arg maxs′ ∆f(s′|A, yB);A←A∪{ s}
end for
Observe yA and set yB← yB∪ yA
untilf(yB)≥Q
batch. Hence it encourages diversity among the items
selected in the batch.
Using this notation, the BatchGreedy policy will
greedily select thei-th element in thej-th batch
si,j = arg max
s∈V
∆f(s|{s1,j,...,s i−1,j}, yB),
where yB is the set of observations (labeled examples)
from batches up to j− 1. After a batch is completed,
all labels are requested and added to the observations
yB. Pseudocode is presented in Algorithm 1.
If we set the batch size k to 1, BatchGreedy reverts
back to a fully sequential, greedy active learning
scheme. In particular, for the active learning example
from Section 2.1, this algorithm is known as General-
ized Binary Search, studied extensively in the literature
(see e.g., Dasgupta (2004)). In fact, it is known that
this simple greedy algorithm is near-optimal: its cost is
upper-bounded byO(log|H|) times that of the optimal
sequential policy. More generally, Golovin & Krause
(2011) prove that this result can be generalized to
any adaptive optimization problems that are adaptive
submodular. As our ﬁrst main theoretical contribution,
we generalize their results, which only hold for fully
sequential policies, to the batch setting.
We ﬁrst show that BatchGreedy is near-optimal as
compared to the optimal batch selection policy.
Theorem 1. Let OPTac,k be the expected cost
and OPTwc,k be the worst-case cost of an opti-
mal policy selecting batches of size k. Further let
δ = min yV∈supp(P)P (yV). Then for the cost of the
policyπG implementing BatchGreedy it holds that
costac(πG)≤ OPTac,k
( e
e− 1
)(
lnQ + 1
)
, and
costwc(πG)≤ OPTwc,k
( e
e− 1
)(
lnQ
δ + 1
)
.
Note that the guarantee of Theorem 1 matches (up
to a small constant factor) hardness results known for
the fully sequential (k = 1) setting, which it general-
izes, therefore BatchGreedy is near-optimal under

Near-optimal Batch Mode Active Learning and Adaptive Submodular Optimization
computational constraints. Further note that for the
active learning application, Theorem 1 guarantees that
in the non-Bayesian setting (i.e., without any prior 6),
BatchGreedy requires at most a factor of O(ln|H|)
more batches than the optimal batch-mode policy.
As our second main theoretical result, we also prove
that, perhaps surprisingly, under certain conditions
BatchGreedy is not just competitive with the
optimal policy that is restricted to selecting batches of
examples: It is competitive with respect to an optimal
fully sequential policy, which is not required to obey
such a restriction. The additional condition needed
is that the variables Y1,...,Y n are independent. This
assumption is satisﬁed in the inﬂuence maximization
application, but not in the active learning problem.
Theorem 2. Fixβ >0. Let OPTwc be the worst-case
cost of an optimal sequential policy π∗, constrained
to picking a number of items which is a multiple
of k. Further suppose that the variables Y1,...,Y n
are independent. Then for the cost of the policy πG
implementing BatchGreedy, run until it achieves
f(πG)≥Q−β it holds that
costwc(πG)≤ OPTwc
(
e/(e− 1)
)2(
lnQ
β + 1
)
.
Moreover, it holds thatP
(
f(S(πG, yV))≥Q
)
≥ 1−β.
The proofs are given in the supplementary material.
The key technical insight behind the proof is that a
bound on the adaptivity gap for stochastic submodular
maximization of Asadpour et al. (2008), adapted and
generalized to our setting, allows us to interpret the
BatchGreedy policy as an approximate implemen-
tation of the fully sequential greedy policy. Note that
Theorem 2, for technical reasons, is of a slightly dif-
ferent ﬂavor than Theorem 1: it compares the optimal
policyπ∗ always achieving quotaQ with one achieving
the quota Q only with probability 1−β. By choosing
β < minyV∈supp(P)P (yV), it can be guaranteed that
in factf(S(πG, yV)) =Q for all yV with nonzero prob-
ability. In this case, the bound on the worst-case cost
of Theorem 2 is only a factor ofe/(e− 1)≈ 1.58 larger
than that of Theorem 1, irrespective of the batch size.
4. Implementation Details
As is, BatchGreedy is not immediately practical
for the applications from Section 2.1: Computing the
marginal gains (3.1) requires computing expectations
6In the special case of uniform prior, δ = 1
|H|. For
general priors (with smallδ), BatchGreedy can be proved
to yield anO(log|H|) approximation, following analogously
from Theorem 9.1 in Golovin & Krause (2011)
−1 −0.5 0 0.5 1−1
−0.5
0
0.5
1
(a) ε = 0
−1 −0.5 0 0.5 1−1
−0.5
0
0.5
1 (b) ε = 0.2
Figure 2. Illustration of Algorithm 2 in 2-d space. Figure
2(a) shows the sampling result in noise-free case (red arrows
are constraints); Figure 2(b) shows sampling result when
20% of the observations are noisy: hypotheses that violate
more constraints induce lower conﬁdence.
Algorithm 2 Hit-and-run hypothesis sampler for lin-
ear separators and noisy observations
Input: Labeled examples yB ∈ Rd, N, number of
mixing iterationsT , noise levelε∈ [0, 0.5).
Output: Hypotheses set ˆH.
w0← a random point ond-dim. unit sphereSd
fori = 1 toN do
θ← a random direction (unit vector) inSd
SetL← Sd∩{ w| w = wi−1 +θρ,ρ ∈R}, and
select wi from sectorL withρ∼ p(ρ)∝ ( ε
1−ε)m,
wherem =|{x : x∈B, (x, sign(wT
i x)) /∈ yB}|
Add everyT -th samplehi(x) = sign(wT
i x) to ˆH
end for
that may be intractable. In the inﬂuence maximization
application, it is possible to perform Monte-Carlo
sampling of the inﬂuence process to evaluate (3.1) up
to arbitrarily small multiplicative error (1 +ε) (Kempe
et al., 2003). Furthermore, with a slight generalization
of the arguments of Golovin & Krause (2011), using
such an approximation of (3.1) increases the cost by at
most the same factor (1 +ε).
To obtain a practical algorithm for batch mode active
learning, further challenges arise: BatchGreedy as is
requires thatH is ﬁnite, and its running time depends
polynomially on |H|. Furthermore, it requires that
observations are noise free. As a practical implemen-
tation, we focus on active learning of linear separators,
i.e., h(x) = sign( wTx). In our experiments we use
a Markov-Chain Monte Carlo sampler in order to
generate samples from the posterior distribution over
hypotheses P (w| yS). In particular, we build on the
hit-and-run sampler (Smith, 1984; Lovasz, 1998), which
is known to lead to a provably eﬃcient near-optimal es-
timation for the fully sequential active learning problem
(Gonen et al., 2011). To handle noise, at each iteration,
we generalize the hit-and-run sampler by sampling the

Near-optimal Batch Mode Active Learning and Adaptive Submodular Optimization
Algorithm 3Approximate implementation ofBatch-
Greedy for batch-mode active learning.
Input: HypothesesH, batch sizek, noise levelε
Sample ˆH ={h1,...,h N} fromH using Algo. 2
Deﬁne ˆP (H) = 1
N
∑N
𝓁=1δh𝓁; set yB←∅
repeat
A←∅
fori = 1 tok do
s←arg min
s′
N∑
𝓁=1
[
ˆP (H({(x,h𝓁(x)): x∈A∪{s′}}))
]
A←A∪{ s}
end for
Observe yA and set yB← yB∪ yA
Sample ˆH ={h1,...,h N} (Algo. 2) using yB
Update approximation ˆP (H) = 1
N
∑N
𝓁=1δh𝓁.
until (1−ε) of all hypotheses in the support of ˆP
induce same labeling on the unlabeled pool
entire version space, while varying the sample density
according to a likelihood function. In the case of sym-
metric binary channel (i.e., labels are ﬂipped with prob-
ability ε), we sample hypotheses with probability re-
lated to the number of mistakes. This way, our method
can handle data that are not linearly separable. Algo-
rithm 2 presents details of our sampler, and our ﬁnal
batch-mode active learning algorithm is formalized in
Algorithm 3. The time complexity of random sampling
(Algorithm 2) isO(TN ), whereT is the number of mix-
ing iterations. Once we discretized the hypothesis space
withN samples, it takesO(knN ) steps for Algorithm 3
to select a batch ofk items. Hence the time complexity
of Algorithm 3 selecting one batch isO(N(T +kn)).
Furthermore, in both applications, we can use lazy
evaluations to speed up the BatchGreedy algorithm
(as used in Golovin & Krause (2011) for the fully
sequential setting). Lazy evaluations utilize the fact
that the marginal gains ∆ f(s| A, yB) are monoton-
ically decreasing in both A and yB. This insight can
be exploited by utilizing priority queues to accelerate
selection of the next greedy choice.
5. Experimental Results
We empirically evaluate BatchGreedy on several
data sets and on both applications discussed in Sec-
tion 2.1. Our emphasis is on comparingBatchGreedy
with baselines, as well as empirically quantifying the
price of parallelism.
Batch mode active learning of linear separators
One natural way to perform batch mode active learn-
ing is to select batches comprising thek most uncertain
examples. As one baseline, we use “batch mode margin-
based active learning” (k-batch SVM) to greedily select
batches of examples, as considered in Jain et al. (2010)
for large-scale active learning. In this method, we ran-
domly chose examples until there are two distinct la-
bels, and we train SVM classiﬁers based on the labeled
examples at the end of each batch. The next k un-
labeled examples with the smallest distances from the
decision boundary wTx +b = 0 are selected for label-
ing. Another baseline approach we employ is the state
of the art batch mode active learning algorithm (KLR-
BMAL) of Hoi et al. (2006) that selects batches of k
examples that are informative w.r.t. the Fisher informa-
tion matrix. To see how well the parallelization of the se-
lection process approximates the sequential algorithm,
we compare with the fully sequential active learning
algorithm, where only one example is selected and ob-
served at each iteration, as well as a “passive learning”
approach, where we make no observations during the
learning process (corresponding to inﬁnite batch size).
We also compareBatchGreedyagainst the sequential
active learning algorithm with purely random selection.
For fair comparison, we use SVM as classiﬁer for all
competing algorithms, so the methods only diﬀer by
the set of examples chosen for labeling. We implement
the KLR-BMAL algorithm using class membership
probabilities inferred from the hypothesis sampler, and
set the smoothing parameter δ to be 0.1 (Hoi et al.,
2006). As for our sampler, we set ε to be 0 .1. We
normalize the data so that each feature has mean 0 and
standard deviation 0.5, and place independent normal
priors on each dimension. The results for all the batch
mode active learning experiments are obtained from
150 random starts.
We run our the ﬁrst set of experiments on two UCI
data sets7, WDBC (569 instances, 32-d) and Australian
(690 instances, 16-d), using a ﬁxed number of 5000
sampled hypotheses in each random trial. Figure 3(a)
and Figure 3(b) depict the 150-trial average percentage
of mistakes made by each algorithm when predicting
the labels of the corresponding data set, for a batch
size of k = 10. Figure 3(b) shows an improvement of
BatchGreedy over both KLR-BMAL and the 10-
batch SVM algorithm. On both datasets, surprisingly,
BatchGreedyis competitive with the fully sequential
greedy algorithm, with only minor diﬀerences. We
also evaluate BatchGreedy on the MNIST data
set. For each of the 14780 instances, we reduced the
dimensionality down to 10 via PCA, and compare
BatchGreedy with the sequential, KLR-BMAL,
10-bacth SVM, passive and random algorithms through
150 random trials. We observe that, even using 5000
7http://archive.ics.uci.edu/ml/

Near-optimal Batch Mode Active Learning and Adaptive Submodular Optimization
10 20 30 40 500
2
4
6
8
10
12
14
Number of labels requested
% Mistakes
 
 
10−batch SVM
passive
10−batch greedy
random
KLR−BMAL
sequential
sequential svm
(a) [A] WDBC
10 20 30 40 50
14
16
18
20
22
24
26
28
30
Number of labels requested
% Mistakes
 
 
10−batch SVM
passive
random
10−batch greedy
KLR−BMAL
sequential
sequential svm (b) [A] Australian
10 20 30 40 500
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
Number of labels requested
% Mistakes
 
 
passive
KLR−BMAL
sequential
sequential svm
10−batch greedy
10−batch SVM
random (c) [A] MNIST
20 30 40 50 60 70
2
3
4
Number of labels requested
% Mistakes
 
 
3000 s.
5000 s.
500 s.
1000 s.
2000 s.
300 s.
(d) [A] WDBC Samples
0 200 400 600 8000
5
10
15
20
25
30
35% Nodes not covered
Number of nodes selected
 
 
Non−adaptive
10−batch
100−batch
sequential (e) [I] Epinions
0 200 400 600 8000
10
20
30
40
50% Nodes not covered
Number of nodes selected
 
 
Non−adaptive
10−batch
100−batch
sequential (f) [I] Slashdot
Figure 3. Results on the [A] active learning and [I] inﬂuence maximization problems. For [A], BatchGreedy outperforms
the state of the art by∼ 48% on average across the three datasets w.r.t the improvement over random selection. Note the
low “price of parallelism” of BatchGreedy: Batch selection performs almost as well as fully sequential selection.
sample hypotheses for each iteration, BatchGreedy
is signiﬁcantly faster than KLR-BMAL, as the cost of
BatchGreedy grows linearly w.r.t. the number of hy-
potheses and number of examples, while KLR-BMAL
costs quadratically w.r.t. the number of examples.
In fact, for the same settings, it takes KLR-BMAL
approx. 50 seconds to select one example, compared to
approx. 10 seconds for BatchGreedy.
We also study the impact of the discretization param-
eterM (i.e., number of hypotheses used to sample the
version space), varying it from 300 to 5000, and we
plot the results for each setting in Figure 3(d). For the
WDBC data set, we can observe a statistically signiﬁcant
performance improvement across the 150 trials when
increasing the number of sampled hypotheses used
from 300 to 2000. Starting from 3000 samples, however,
the advantage of introducing more samples begins to
decrease dramatically. As there is a linear increase in
running time as we employ more samples, we suggest to
pick a moderateM to balance eﬃciency and accuracy.
Multi-stage inﬂuence maximization in Social
Networks We also apply BatchGreedy to the
multi-stage inﬂuence maximization problem described
in Section 2.1. We use two data sets from the SNAP
repository8: the Epinions social network (with 75879
8http://snap.stanford.edu/
nodes and 508837 directed edges, where members of
the site can decide whether to “trust” each other) and
the Slashdot social network (with 82168 nodes and
948464 directed edges, where users are allowed to tag
each other as friends or foes). For each network, we
take the subgraph induced by the top 1000 nodes with
largest outdegree. We use the independent cascade
model (Kempe et al., 2003). In our simulations, we
assume that each person has a certain, ﬁxed probability
to inﬂuence its neighbors. We choose this probability
t according to the edge density of the target network,
in our case to 0.05 and 0.03, respectively.
We evaluate the performance of BatchGreedy while
varying the size of batches picked at each stage. We
repeat the experiments 100 times for all batch sizes
(the non-adaptive method corresponds to inﬁnite batch
size). In each experiment, we initialize 100 random
realizations of the target network based on the edge
activation probability, and greedily select the best
node in expectation. The results are summarized in
Figure 3(e) and Figure 3(f). We observe that for the
Epinions network, the sequential greedy policy covers
99% of the target network by selecting 244 nodes, while
the 10-batch greedy policy, 100-batch greedy policy
and non-adaptive greedy policy cost 241, 284, and
584 nodes respectively, to achieve the same coverage.

Near-optimal Batch Mode Active Learning and Adaptive Submodular Optimization
Similarly, for the Slashdot network those numbers are
330, 319, 343, 765. After incorporation of the ﬁrst batch
of labels, BatchGreedy performs surprisingly well,
even competitively with the fully sequential policy.
6. Related Work
Active Learning Fully sequential active learning,
where one single unlabeled example is selected to
be labeled at a time, has received much attention in
the machine learning community. Several heuristic
approaches have been proposed that perform well
in some applications (e.g., MacKay (1992); Settles
(2010)), and theoretical investigations (e.g., Balcan
et al. (2006); Dasgupta (2006)) prove bounds on the
label complexity. While in some cases exponential
reduction is possible, in other settings little reduction
over passive learning can be achieved (Dasgupta,
2006). Therefore, it is interesting to study active
learning as an optimization problem with the goal to
eﬃciently identify a suﬃcient yet near-minimal number
of informative labels. For both noise-free (Dasgupta,
2004) and noisy (Golovin et al., 2010) active leaning
problems, simple greedy policies have been shown to
be provably competitive with the optimal (intractable)
policy. This paper builds on these approaches, and
generalizes the results to batch mode active learning.
Batch mode active learning and submodularity
Due to its practical importance, several approaches for
batch mode active learning have been proposed. How-
ever, previous work has focused on eﬃciently selecting
a single batch comprising examples that are both
diverse and informative. Interestingly, the classical
notion of submodular set functions has proven useful
(Hoi et al., 2006; Guillory & Bilmes, 2011). In Hoi et al.
(2006), both individual diversity and informativeness
are evaluated w.r.t. the Fisher information matrix of
the estimated linear separator. Cesa-Bianchi et al.
(2010) and Guillory & Bilmes (2011) investigate the
problem of active learning on graph structured data,
and provide near-optimal solutions for such problems.
In contrast to the prior work, this paper focuses
on analyzing batch-mode policies, i.e., sequential
construction of batches with the goal to minimize the
overall number of labels needed across batches. A
work closely related in spirit is that of Desautels et al.
(2012), who consider batch mode bandit problems,
where the goal is to trade exploration and exploitation,
and performance is measured w.r.t. the cumulative
regret. In spite of a diﬀerent context and formalism, a
greedy algorithm works provably well in that setting.
Adaptive and interactive submodular opti-
mization For a general introduction to adaptive
submodular optimization, see Golovin & Krause
(2011). Asadpour et al. (2008) study a special case of
the adaptive submodular maximization problem where
the random variables must be independent (which is
not the case in active learning). Guillory & Bilmes
(2010) consider a diﬀerent formalism for interactive
submodular maximization and its applications, ana-
lyzing the worst-case cost of fully sequential policies.
In contrast to these previous approaches, which
focus on the fully sequential case, in this paper we
analyze the batch-mode setting, for which we provide
approximation bounds as well as practical algorithms.
Inﬂuence maximization This problem was ﬁrst
introduced by Domingos & Richardson (2001), and
Kempe et al. (2003) prove that the problem of (non-
adaptively) ﬁnding the optimal k individuals in the
network to target requires submodular maximization.
Recently, by using adaptive submodularity, Golovin
& Krause (2011) generalize the problem to the fully
sequential setting where observations are made after
each selection. Our results generalize theirs and ad-
dress the multi-stage setting, which, to our knowledge,
is the ﬁrst attempt to address this natural variant of
the inﬂuence maximization problem.
7. Conclusions
We presented a general framework for batch mode
active learning and stochastic optimization. We
analyzed BatchGreedy, an intuitive adaptive greedy
approach, and proved its competitiveness with the op-
timal batch-mode policy. For some problem instances
(e.g., multi-stage inﬂuence maximization) we proved
that, perhaps surprisingly, using batches only incurs a
bounded increase of cost as compared to allowing fully
sequential selection. In addition to new theoretical
results, we empirically demonstrate the eﬀectiveness
of BatchGreedy on two real-world applications:
Batch mode active learning of linear separators (where
BatchGreedy outperforms the state of the art), and
multi-stage inﬂuence maximization (where we observe a
surprisingly small increase in cost compared to the fully
sequential strategy). A natural question for future work
is to understand more generally for which problems
the price of parallelism, i.e., the increase in cost by re-
stricting to information-parallel decisions, is bounded.
We believe that our results provide an important step
in characterizing the (approximate) tractability of
practical active learning and optimization problems.
Acknowledgments. We would like to thank G´ abor
Bart´ ok for helpful comments. This research was supported
in part by SNSF grant 200021 137971, NSF IIS-0953413,
DARPA MSEE FA8650-11-1-7156 and ERC StG 307036.

Near-optimal Batch Mode Active Learning and Adaptive Submodular Optimization
References
Anshelevich, Elliot, Chakrabarty, Deeparnab, Hate,
Ameya, and Swamy, Chaitanya. Approximation al-
gorithms for the ﬁreﬁghter problem: Cuts over time
and submodularity. InAlgorithms and Computation.
Springer Berlin / Heidelberg, 2009.
Asadpour, Arash, Nazerzadeh, Hamid, and Saberi,
Amin. Stochastic submodular maximization. In
WINE, pp. 477–489, Berlin, Heidelberg, 2008.
Springer-Verlag.
Balcan, Maria Florina, Beygelzimer, Alina, and Lang-
ford, John. Agnostic active learning. In ICML, pp.
65–72, 2006.
Cesa-Bianchi, Nicol` o, Gentile, Claudio, Vitale, Fabio,
and Zappella, Giovanni. Active learning on trees
and graphs. In COLT, pp. 320–332, 2010.
Dasgupta, Sanjoy. Analysis of a greedy active learning
strategy. In NIPS, 2004.
Dasgupta, Sanjoy. Coarse sample complexity bounds
for active learning. In Weiss, Y., Sch¨ olkopf, B., and
Platt, J. (eds.), Advances in Neural Information
Processing Systems 18 , pp. 235–242. MIT Press,
Cambridge, MA, 2006.
Desautels, Thomas, Krause, Andreas, and Burdick,
Joel. Parallelizing exploration-exploitation tradeoﬀs
with gaussian process bandit optimization. InICML,
2012.
Domingos, Pedro and Richardson, Matt. Mining the
network value of customers. InKDD, pp. 57–66, 2001.
Golovin, Daniel and Krause, Andreas. Adaptive sub-
modularity: Theory and applications in active learn-
ing and stochastic optimization. Journal of Artiﬁcial
Intelligence Research (JAIR), 42:427–486, 2011.
Golovin, Daniel, Krause, Andreas, and Ray, Debajyoti.
Near-optimal bayesian active learning with noisy
observations. In NIPS, December 2010.
Golovin, Daniel, Krause, Andreas, Gardner, Beth, Con-
verse, Sarah, and Morey, Steve. Dynamic resource
allocation in conservation planning. In AAAI, 2011.
Gonen, Alon, Sabato, Sivan, and Shalev-Shwartz,
Shai. Active learning halfspaces under margin
assumptions. CoRR, abs/1112.1556v3, 2011.
Guillory, Andrew and Bilmes, Jeﬀ. Interactive
submodular set cover. In ICML, 2010.
Guillory, Andrew and Bilmes, Jeﬀ. Active semi-
supervised learning using submodular functions. In
UAI, 2011.
Hoi, Steven C. H., Jin, Rong, Zhu, Jianke, and Lyu,
Michael R. Batch mode active learning and its appli-
cation to medical image classiﬁcation. InICML, 2006.
Jain, Prateek, Vijayanarasimhan, Sudheendra, and
Grauman, Kristen. Hashing hyperplane queries
to near points with applications to large-scale
active learning. In Advances in Neural Information
Processing Systems 23, pp. 928–936. 2010.
Kempe, David, Kleinberg, Jon, and Tardos, ´Eva.
Maximizing the spread of inﬂuence through a social
network. In KDD, pp. 137–146, 2003.
Lovasz, Laszlo. Hit-and-run mixes fast. Math. Prog,
86:443–461, 1998.
MacKay, David J.C. Information-based objective func-
tions for active data selection. Neural Computation,
4(4):590–604, 1992.
Settles, Burr. Active learning literature survey. Tech-
nical Report 1648, University of Wisconsin-Madison,
2010.
Smith, Robert L. Eﬃcient monte carlo procedures
for generating points uniformly distributed over
bounded regions. Operations Research, 1984.