Adaptive Submodularity: Theory and Applications in Active Learning
and Stochastic Optimization
Daniel Golovin ANTISPAM .GOLOVIN @GMAIL .COM
California Institute of Technology
Pasadena, CA 91125, USA
Andreas Krause ANTISPAM .KRAUSEA @ETHZ .CH
ETH Zurich
8092 Zurich, Switzerland
Abstract
Many problems in artiﬁcial intelligence require adaptively making a sequence of decisions with uncertain
outcomes under partial observability. Solving such stochastic optimization problems is a fundamental but
notoriously difﬁcult challenge. In this paper, we introduce the concept of adaptive submodularity, generalizing
submodular set functions to adaptive policies. We prove that if a problem satisﬁes this property, a simple
adaptive greedy algorithm is guaranteed to be competitive with the optimal policy. In addition to providing
performance guarantees for both stochastic maximization and coverage, adaptive submodularity can be exploited
to drastically speed up the greedy algorithm by using lazy evaluations. We illustrate the usefulness of the concept
by giving several examples of adaptive submodular objectives arising in diverse AI applications including
management of sensing resources, viral marketing and active learning. Proving adaptive submodularity for these
problems allows us to recover existing results in these applications as special cases, improve approximation
guarantees and handle natural generalizations.
Keywords: Adaptive Optimization, Stochastic Optimization, Submodularity, Partial Observability, Active
Learning, Optimal Decision Trees
1. Introduction
In many problems arising in artiﬁcial intelligence one needs to adaptively make a sequence of decisions, taking
into account observations about the outcomes of past decisions. Often these outcomes are uncertain, and
one may only know a probability distribution over them. Finding optimal policies for decision making in
such partially observable stochastic optimization problems is notoriously intractable (see, e.g., Littman et al.
(1998)). A fundamental challenge is to identify classes of planning problems for which simple solutions obtain
(near-) optimal performance.
In this paper, we introduce the concept of adaptive submodularity, and prove that if a partially observable
stochastic optimization problem satisﬁes this property, a simple adaptive greedy algorithm is guaranteed to
obtain near-optimal solutions. In fact, under reasonable complexity-theoretic assumptions, no polynomial time
algorithm is able to obtain better solutions in general. Adaptive submodularity generalizes the classical notion
of submodularity1, which has been successfully used to develop approximation algorithms for a variety of
non-adaptive optimization problems. Submodularity, informally, is an intuitive notion of diminishing returns,
which states that adding an element to a small set helps more than adding that same element to a larger (super-)
set. A celebrated result of the work of Nemhauser et al. (1978) guarantees that for such submodular functions,
a simple greedy algorithm, which adds the element that maximally increases the objective value, selects a
near-optimal set ofk elements. Similarly, it is guaranteed to ﬁnd a set of near-minimal cost that achieves a
desired quota of utility (Wolsey, 1982), using near-minimum average time to do so (Streeter and Golovin,
0. This work appeared in the Journal of Artiﬁcial Intelligence Research (Golovin and Krause, 2011a), and an eariler extended abstract
appeared in the International Conference on Learning Theory (Golovin and Krause, 2010).
1. For an extensive treatment of submodularity, see the books of Fujishige (2005) and Schrijver (2003).
c©2012 Daniel Golovin and Andreas Krause.
arXiv:1003.3967v5  [cs.LG]  6 Dec 2017

2008). Besides guaranteeing theoretical performance bounds, submodularity allows us to speed up algorithms
without loss of solution quality by using lazy evaluations (Minoux, 1978), often leading to performance
improvements of several orders of magnitude (Leskovec et al., 2007). Submodularity has been shown to be
very useful in a variety of problems in artiﬁcial intelligence (Krause and Guestrin, 2009b).
The challenge in generalizing submodularity to adaptive planning — where the action taken in each step
depends on information obtained in the previous steps — is that feasible solutions are now policies (decision
trees or conditional plans) instead of subsets. We propose a natural generalization of the diminishing returns
property for adaptive problems, which reduces to the classical characterization of submodular set functions for
deterministic distributions. We show how these results of Nemhauser et al. (1978), Wolsey (1982), Streeter
and Golovin (2008), and Minoux (1978) generalize to the adaptive setting. Hence, we demonstrate how
adaptive submodular optimization problems enjoy theoretical and practical beneﬁts similar to those of classical,
nonadaptive submodular problems. We further demonstrate the usefulness and generality of the concept by
showing how it captures known results in stochastic optimization and active learning as special cases, admits
tighter performance bounds, leads to natural generalizations and allows us to solve new problems for which no
performance guarantees were known.
As a ﬁrst example, consider the problem of deploying (or controlling) a collection of sensors to monitor
some spatial phenomenon. Each sensor can cover a region depending on its sensing range. Suppose we would
like to ﬁnd the best subset ofk locations to place the sensors. In this application, intuitively, adding a sensor
helps more if we have placed few sensors so far and helps less if we have already placed many sensors. We
can formalize this diminishing returns property using the notion of submodularity – the total area covered by
the sensors is a submodular function deﬁned over all sets of locations. Krause and Guestrin (2007) show that
many more realistic utility functions in sensor placement (such as the improvement in prediction accuracy
w.r.t. some probabilistic model) are submodular as well. Now consider the following stochastic variant: Instead
of deploying a ﬁxed set of sensors, we deploy one sensor at a time. With a certain probability, deployed sensors
can fail, and our goal is to maximize the area covered by the functioning sensors. Thus, when deploying the
next sensor, we need to take into account which of the sensors we deployed in the past failed. This problem
has been studied by Asadpour et al. (2008) for the case where each sensor fails independently at random. In
this paper, we show that the coverage objective is adaptive submodular, and use this concept to handle much
more general settings (where, e.g., rather than all-or-nothing failures there are different types of sensor failures
of varying severity). We also consider a related problem where the goal is to place the minimum number of
sensors to achieve the maximum possible sensor coverage (i.e., the coverage obtained by deploying sensors
everywhere), or more generally the goal may be to achieve any ﬁxed percentage of the maximum possible
sensor coverage. Under the ﬁrst goal, the problem is equivalent to one studied by Goemans and V ondr ´ak
(2006), and generalizes a problem studied by Liu et al. (2008).
As another example, consider a viral marketing problem, where we are given a social network, and we
want to inﬂuence as many people as possible in the network to buy some product. We do that by giving the
product for free to a subset of the people, and hope that they convince their friends to buy the product as well.
Formally, we have a graph, and each edge e is labeled by a number 0≤ pe≤ 1. We “inﬂuence” a subset
of nodes in the graph, and for each inﬂuenced node, their neighbors get randomly inﬂuenced according to
the probability annotated on the edge connecting the nodes. This process repeats until no further node gets
inﬂuenced. Kempe et al. (2003) show that the set function which quantiﬁes the expected number of nodes
inﬂuenced is submodular. A natural stochastic variant of the problem is where we pick a node, get to see
which nodes it inﬂuenced, then adaptively pick the next node based on these observations and so on. We show
that a large class of such adaptive inﬂuence maximization problems satisﬁes adaptive submodularity.
Our third application is in active learning, where we are given an unlabeled data set, and we would like
to adaptively pick a small set of examples whose labels imply all other labels. The same problem arises in
automated diagnosis, where we have hypotheses about the state of the system (e.g., what illness a patient has),
and would like to perform tests to identify the correct hypothesis. In both domains we want to pick examples /
tests to shrink the remaining version space (the set of consistent hypotheses) as quickly as possible. Here, we
show that the reduction in version space probability mass is adaptive submodular, and use that observation
to prove that the adaptive greedy algorithm is a near-optimal querying policy. Our results for active learning
2

Name New Results Location
A.S. Maximization Tight (1− 1/e)-approx. for A.M.S. objectives §5.1, page 10
A.S. Min Cost Coverage Squared logarithmic approx. for A.M.S. objectives §5.2, page 12
A.S. Min Sum Cover Tight 4-approx. for A.M.S. objectives §5.3, page 15
Data Dependent Bounds Generalization to A.M.S. functions §5.1, page 10
Accelerated Greedy Generalization of lazy evaluations to the adaptive setting §4, page 9
Stochastic Submodular
Maximization
Generalization of the previous (1− 1/e)-approx. to arbitrary
per–item set distributions, and to item costs
§6, page 16
Stochastic Set Cover (ln(n) + 1)2-approx. for arbitrary per-item set distributions,
with item costs
§7, page 18
Adaptive Viral Marketing Adaptive analog of previous(1−1/e)-approx. for non-adaptive
viral marketing, under more general reward functions; squared
logarithmic approx. for the adaptive min cost cover version
§8, page 20
Active Learning New analysis for generalized binary search and its approximate
versions with and without item costs
§9, page 24
Hardness in the absence of
Adapt. Submodularity
Ω(|E|1−ϵ)-approximation hardness for A.S. Maximization,
Min Cost Coverage, and Min-Sum Cover, iff is not adaptive
submodular.
§12, page 33
Table 1: Summary of our theoretical results. A.S. is shorthand for “adaptive stochastic”, and A.M.S. is
shorthand for “adaptive monotone submodular.”
and automated diagnosis are also related to recent results of Guillory and Bilmes (2010, 2011) who study
generalizations of submodular set cover to an interactive setting. In contrast to our approach however, Guillory
and Bilmes analyze worst-case costs, and use rather different technical deﬁnitions and proof techniques.
We summarize our main contributions below, and provide a more technical summary in Table 1. At a high
level, our main contributions are:
• We consider a particular class of partially observable adaptive stochastic optimization problems, which
we prove to be hard to approximate in general.
• We introduce the concept of adaptive submodularity, and prove that if a problem instance satisﬁes
this property, a simple adaptive greedy policy performs near-optimally, for both adaptive stochastic
maximization and coverage, and also a natural min-sum objective.
• We show how adaptive submodularity can be exploited by allowing the use of an accelerated adaptive
greedy algorithm using lazy evaluations, and how we can obtain data-dependent bounds on the optimum.
• We illustrate adaptive submodularity on several realistic problems, including Stochastic Maximum
Coverage, Stochastic Submodular Coverage, Adaptive Viral Marketing, and Active Learning. For these
applications, adaptive submodularity allows us to recover known results and prove natural generaliza-
tions.
1.1 Organization
This article is organized as follows. In§2 (page 4) we set up notation and formally deﬁne the relevant adaptive
optimization problems for general objective functions. For the reader’s convenience, we have also provided
a reference table of important symbols on page 58. In§3 (page 6) we review the classical notion of submod-
ularity and introduce the novel adaptive submodularity property. In§4 (page 9) we introduce the adaptive
greedy policy, as well as an accelerated variant. In§5 (page 10) we discuss the theoretical guarantees that
the adaptive greedy policy enjoys when applied to problems with adaptive submodular objectives. Sections 6
through 9 provide examples on how to apply the adaptive submodular framework to various applications,
3

namely Stochastic Submodular Maximization (§6, page 16), Stochastic Submodular Coverage (§7, page 18),
Adaptive Viral Marketing (§8, page 20), and Active Learning (§9, page 24). In §10 (page 29) we report
empirical results on two sensor selection problems. In §11 (page 31) we discuss the adaptivity gap of the
problems we consider, and in§12 (page 33) we prove hardness results indicating that problems which are not
adaptive submodular can be extremely inapproximable under reasonable complexity assumptions. We review
related work in§13 (page 34) and provide concluding remarks in§14 (page 36). The Appendix (page 41)
gives details of how to incorporate item costs and includes all of the proofs omitted from the main text.
2. Adaptive Stochastic Optimization
We start by introducing notation and deﬁning the general class of adaptive optimization problems that we
address in this paper. For sake of clarity, we will illustrate our notation using the sensor placement application
mentioned in§1. We give examples of other applications in§6,§7,§8, and§9.
2.1 Items and Realizations
LetE be a ﬁnite set of items (e.g., sensor locations). Each iteme∈E is in a particular (initially unknown)
state from a setO of possible states (describing whether a sensor placed at locatione would malfunction or
not). We represent the item states using a functionφ :E→O, called a realization (of the states of all items in
the ground set). Thus, we say that φ(e) is the state ofe under realizationφ. We use Φ to denote a random
realization. We take a Bayesian approach and assume that there is a known prior probability distribution
p (φ) := P [Φ =φ] over realizations (e.g., modeling that sensors fail independently with failure probability),
so that we can compute posterior distributions2. We will consider problems where we sequentially pick an
iteme∈E, get to see its state Φ(e), pick the next item, get to see its state, and so on (e.g., place a sensor, see
whether it fails, and so on). After each pick, our observations so far can be represented as a partial realization
ψ, a function from some subset ofE (i.e., the set of items that we already picked) to their states (e.g.,ψ encodes
where we placed sensors and which of them failed). For notational convenience, we sometimes representψ as
a relation, so thatψ⊆E×O equals{(e,o ) :ψ(e) =o}. We use the notation dom(ψ) ={e :∃o.(e,o )∈ψ}
to refer to the domain ofψ (i.e., the set of items observed inψ). A partial realizationψ is consistent with a
realizationφ if they are equal everywhere in the domain ofψ. In this case we writeφ∼ψ. Ifψ andψ′ are
both consistent with someφ, and dom(ψ)⊆ dom(ψ′), we sayψ is a subrealization ofψ′. Equivalently,ψ is
a subrealization ofψ′ if and only if, when viewed as relations,ψ⊆ψ′.
Partial realizations are similar to the notion of “belief states” in Partially Observable Markov Decision
Problems (POMDPs), as they encode the effect of all actions taken (items selected) and observations made,
and determine our posterior belief about the state of the world (i.e., the state of all itemse not yet selected,
p (φ|ψ) := P [Φ =φ| Φ∼ψ]).
2.2 Policies
We encode our adaptive strategy for picking items as a policyπ, which is a function from a set of partial
realizations toE, specifying which item to pick next under a particular set of observations (e.g.,π chooses
the next sensor location given where we have placed sensors so far, and whether they failed or not). We also
allow randomized policies that are functions from a set of partial realizations to distributions onE, though
our emphasis will primarily be on deterministic policies. Ifψ is not in the domain ofπ, the policy terminates
(stops picking items) upon observation of ψ. We use dom(π) to denote the domain of π. Technically, we
require that dom(π) be closed under subrealizations. That is, ifψ′∈ dom(π) andψ is a subrealization ofψ′
thenψ∈ dom(π). We use the notation E(π,φ ) to refer to the set of items selected by π under realization
φ. Each deterministic policyπ can be associated with a decision treeTπ in a natural way (see Fig. 1 for an
2. In some situations, we may not have exact knowledge of the priorp (φ). Obtaining algorithms that are robust to incorrect priors
remains an interesting source of open problems. We brieﬂy discuss some robustness guarantees of our algorithm in§4 on page 9.
4

Figure 1: Illustration of a policy π, its corresponding decision tree representation, and the decision tree
representation ofπ[2], the level 2 truncation ofπ (as deﬁned in§5.1).
illustration). Here, we adopt a policy-centric view that admits concise notation, though we ﬁnd the decision
tree view to be valuable conceptually.
Since partial realizations are similar to POMDP belief states, our deﬁnition of policies is similar to the
notion of policies in POMDPs, which are usually deﬁned as functions from belief states to actions. We will
further discuss the relationship between the stochastic optimization problems considered in this paper and
POMDPs in Section 13.
2.3 Adaptive Stochastic Maximization, Coverage, and Min-Sum Coverage
We wish to maximize, subject to some constraints, a utility functionf : 2E×OE→ R≥0 that depends on
which items we pick and which state each item is in (e.g., modeling the total area covered by the working
sensors). Based on this notation, the expected utility of a policyπ isfavg(π) := E [f(E(π, Φ), Φ)] where the
expectation is taken with respect top (φ). The goal of the Adaptive Stochastic Maximization problem is to ﬁnd
a policyπ∗ such that
π∗∈ arg max
π
favg(π) subject to|E(π,φ )|≤ k for allφ, (1)
wherek is a budget on how many items can be picked (e.g., we would like to adaptively choose k sensor
locations such that the working sensors provide as much information as possible in expectation).
Alternatively, we can specify a quotaQ of utility that we would like to obtain, and try to ﬁnd the cheapest
policy achieving that quota (e.g., we would like to achieve a certain amount of information, as cheaply as
possible in expectation). Formally, we deﬁne the average costcavg(π) of a policy as the expected number of
items it picks, so thatcavg(π) := E [|E(π, Φ)|]. Our goal is then to ﬁnd
π∗∈ arg min
π
cavg(π) such thatf(E(π,φ ),φ )≥Q for allφ, (2)
i.e., the policyπ∗ that minimizes the expected number of items picked such that under all possible realizations,
at least utilityQ is achieved. We call Problem 2 the Adaptive Stochastic Minimum Cost Cover problem. We
will also consider the problem where we want to minimize the worst-case cost cwc(π) := maxφ|E(π,φ )|.
This worst-case costcwc(π) is the cost incurred under adversarially chosen realizations, or equivalently the
depth of the deepest leaf inTπ, the decision tree associated withπ.
Yet another important variant is to minimize the average time required by a policy to obtain its utility.
Formally, letu(π,t ) be the expected utility obtained byπ aftert steps3, letQ = E [f(E, Φ)] be the maximum
possible expected utility, and deﬁne the min-sum costcΣ(π) of a policy ascΣ(π) :=∑∞
t=0 (Q−u(π,t )). We
then deﬁne the Adaptive Stochastic Min-Sum Cover problem as the search for
π∗∈ arg min
π
cΣ(π). (3)
Unfortunately, as we will show in§12, even for linear functionsf, i.e., those wheref(A,φ ) =∑
e∈Awe,φ
is simply the sum of weights (depending on the realizationφ), Problems (1), (2), and (3) are hard to approximate
3. For a more formal deﬁnition of u(π,t ), see§15.5 on page 56.
5

under reasonable complexity theoretic assumptions. Despite the hardness of the general problems, in the
following sections we will identify conditions that are sufﬁcient to allow us to approximately solve them.
2.4 Incorporating Item Costs
Instead of quantifying the cost of a setE(π,φ ) by the number of elements|E(π,φ )|, we can also consider
the case where each iteme∈E has a costc(e), and the cost of a setS⊆E isc(S) =∑
e∈Sc(e). We can
then consider variants of Problems (1), (2), and (3) with the|E(π,φ )| replaced byc(E(π,φ )). For clarity of
presentation, we will focus on the unit cost case, i.e.,c(e) = 1 for alle, and explain how our results generalize
to the non-uniform case in the Appendix.
3. Adaptive Submodularity
We ﬁrst review the classical notion of submodular set functions, and then introduce the novel notion of adaptive
submodularity.
3.1 Background on Submodularity
Let us ﬁrst consider the very special case wherep (φ) is deterministic or, equivalently,|O| = 1 (e.g., in our
sensor placement applications, sensors never fail). In this case, the realization φ is known to the decision
maker in advance, and thus there is no beneﬁt in adaptive selection. Given the realizationφ, Problem (1) is
equivalent to ﬁnding a setA∗⊆E such that
A∗∈ arg max
A⊆E
f(A,φ ) such that|A|≤ k. (4)
For most interesting classes of utility functionsf, this is an NP-hard optimization problem. However, in many
practical problems, such as those mentioned in§1,f(A) =f(A,φ ) satisﬁes submodularity. A set function
f : 2E→ R is called submodular if, wheneverA⊆B⊆E ande∈E\B it holds that
f(A∪{e})−f(A)≥f(B∪{e})−f(B), (5)
i.e., addinge to the smaller setA increasesf by at least as much as addinge to the supersetB. Furthermore,f
is called monotone, if, wheneverA⊆B it holds thatf(A)≤f(B) (e.g., adding a sensor can never reduce the
amount of information obtained). A celebrated result by Nemhauser et al. (1978) states that for monotone sub-
modular functions withf(∅) = 0, a simple greedy algorithm that starts with the empty set,A0 =∅ and chooses
Ai+1 =Ai∪{ arg max
e∈E\Ai
f(Ai∪{e})} (6)
guarantees that f(Ak)≥ (1− 1/e) max|A|≤kf(A). Thus, the greedy set Ak obtains at least a (1− 1/e)
fraction of the optimal value achievable usingk elements. Furthermore, Feige (1998) shows that this result
is tight if P⁄= NP; under this assumption no polynomial time algorithm can do strictly better than the greedy
algorithm, i.e., achieve a (1− 1/e +ϵ)-approximation for any constantϵ >0, even for the special case of
Maximumk-Cover wheref(A) is the cardinality of the union of sets indexed byA. Similarly, Wolsey (1982)
shows that the same greedy algorithm also near-optimally solves the deterministic case of Problem (2), called
the Minimum Submodular Cover problem:
A∗∈ arg min
A⊆E
|A| such thatf(A)≥Q. (7)
Pick the ﬁrst set A𝓁 constructed by the greedy algorithm such that f(A𝓁)≥ Q. Then, for integer-valued
submodular functions, 𝓁 is at most|A∗|(1 + log maxef(e)), i.e., the greedy set is at most a logarithmic
factor larger than the smallest set achieving quota Q. For the special case of Set Cover, where f(A) is the
6

cardinality of a union of sets indexed by A, this result matches a lower bound by Feige (1998): Unless
NP⊆ DTIME(nO(log logn)), Set Cover is hard to approximate by a factor better than (1−ε) lnQ, whereQ
is the number of elements to be covered.
Now let us relax the assumption thatp (φ) is deterministic. In this case, we may still want to ﬁnd a non-
adaptive solution (i.e., a constant policyπA that always picks setA independently of Φ) maximizingfavg(πA).
Iff is pointwise submodular, i.e.,f(A,φ ) is submodular inA for any ﬁxedφ, the functionf(A) =favg(πA)
is submodular, since nonnegative linear combinations of submodular functions remain submodular. Thus,
the greedy algorithm allows us to ﬁnd a near-optimal non-adaptive policy. That is, in our sensor placement
example, if we are willing to commit to all locations before ﬁnding out whether the sensors fail or not, the
greedy algorithm can provide a good solution to this non-adaptive problem.
However, in practice, we may be more interested in obtaining a non-constant policy π, that adaptively
chooses items based on previous observations (e.g., takes into account which sensors are working before
placing the next sensor). In many settings, selecting items adaptively offers huge advantages, analogous
to the advantage of binary search over sequential (linear) search 4. Thus, the question is whether there is a
natural extension of submodularity to policies. In the following, we will develop such a notion – adaptive
submodularity.
3.2 Adaptive Monotonicity and Submodularity
The key challenge is to ﬁnd appropriate generalizations of monotonicity and of the diminishing returns
condition (5). We begin by again considering the very special case where p (φ) is deterministic, so that
the policies are non-adaptive. In this case a policy π simply speciﬁes a sequence of items (e1,e 2,...,e r)
which it selects in order. Monotonicity in this context can be characterized as the property that “the marginal
beneﬁt of selecting an item is always nonnegative,” meaning that for all such sequences (e1,e 2,...,e r),
itemse and 1≤i≤r it holds thatf({ej :j≤i}∪{ e})−f({ej :j≤i})≥ 0. Similarly, submodularity
can be viewed as the property that “selecting an item later never increases its marginal beneﬁt,” meaning
that for all sequences (e1,e 2,...,e r), items e, and all i≤ r, f({ej :j≤i}∪{ e})−f({ej :j≤i})≥
f({ej :j≤r}∪{ e})−f({ej :j≤r}).
We take these views of monotonicity and submodularity when deﬁning their adaptive analogues, by using
an appropriate generalization of the marginal beneﬁt. When moving to the general adaptive setting, the
challenge is that the items’ states are now random and only revealed upon selection. A natural approach is
thus to condition on observations (i.e., partial realizations of selected items), and take the expectation with
respect to the items that we consider selecting. Hence, we deﬁne our adaptive monotonicity and submodularity
properties in terms of the conditional expected marginal beneﬁt of an item.
Deﬁnition 1 (Conditional Expected Marginal Beneﬁt) Given a partial realization ψ and an item e, the
conditional expected marginal beneﬁt ofe conditioned on having observedψ, denoted ∆(e|ψ), is
∆(e|ψ) := E
[
f(dom(ψ)∪{e}, Φ)−f(dom(ψ), Φ)
⏐⏐⏐⏐ Φ∼ψ
]
(8)
where the expectation is computed with respect top (φ|ψ) = P [Φ =φ| Φ∼ψ]. Similarly, the conditional
expected marginal beneﬁt of a policyπ is
∆(π|ψ) := E
[
f(dom(ψ)∪E(π, Φ), Φ)−f(dom(ψ), Φ)
⏐⏐⏐⏐ Φ∼ψ
]
. (9)
In our sensor placement example, ∆(e|ψ) quantiﬁes the expected amount of additional area covered by
placing a sensor at locatione, in expectation over the posterior distributionpΦ(e)(o) := P [Φ(e) =o| Φ∼ψ]
of whether the sensor will fail or not, and taking into account the area covered by the placed working
4. We provide a well–known example in active learning that illustrates this phenomenon crisply in §9; see Fig. 4 on page 24. We
consider the general question of the magnitude of the potential beneﬁts of adaptivity in§11 on page 31 .
7

sensors as encoded byψ. Note that the beneﬁt we have accrued upon observing ψ (and hence after having
selected the items in dom(ψ)) is E [f(dom(ψ), Φ) | Φ∼ψ], which is the beneﬁt term subtracted out in
Eq. (8) and Eq. (9). Similarly, the expected total beneﬁt obtained after observing ψ and then selectinge is
E [f(dom(ψ)∪{e}, Φ) | Φ∼ψ]. The corresponding beneﬁt for running π after observing ψ is slightly
more complex. Under realizationφ∼ψ, the ﬁnal cumulative beneﬁt will bef(dom(ψ)∪E(π,φ ),φ ). Taking
the expectation with respect to p (φ|ψ) and subtracting out the beneﬁt already obtained by dom(ψ) then
yields the conditional expected marginal beneﬁt ofπ.
We are now ready to introduce our generalizations of monotonicity and submodularity to the adaptive
setting:
Deﬁnition 2 (Adaptive Monotonicity) A functionf : 2E×OE→ R≥0 is adaptive monotone with respect
to distributionp (φ) if the conditional expected marginal beneﬁt of any item is nonnegative, i.e., for allψ with
P [Φ∼ψ]> 0 and alle∈E we have
∆(e|ψ)≥ 0. (10)
Deﬁnition 3 (Adaptive Submodularity) A function f : 2E×OE → R≥0 is adaptive submodular with
respect to distributionp (φ) if the conditional expected marginal beneﬁt of any ﬁxed item does not increase as
more items are selected and their states are observed. Formally,f is adaptive submodular w.r.t.p (φ) if for all
ψ andψ′ such thatψ is a subrealization ofψ′ (i.e.,ψ⊆ψ′), and for alle∈E\ dom(ψ′), we have
∆(e|ψ)≥ ∆(e|ψ′). (11)
From the decision tree perspective, the condition ∆(e|ψ)≥ ∆(e|ψ′) amounts to saying that for any
decision treeT , if we are at a nodev inT which selects an iteme, and compare the expected marginal beneﬁt
ofe selected atv with the expected marginal beneﬁte would have obtained if it were selected at an ancestor of
v inT , then the latter must be no smaller than the former. Note that when comparing the two expected marginal
beneﬁts, there is a difference in both the set of items previously selected (i.e., dom(ψ) vs. dom(ψ′)) and
in the distribution over realizations (i.e.,p (φ|ψ) vs.p (φ|ψ′)). It is also worth emphasizing that adaptive
submodularity is deﬁned relative to the distribution p (φ) over realizations; it is possible that f is adaptive
submodular with respect to one distribution, but not with respect to another.
We will give concrete examples of adaptive monotone and adaptive submodular functions that arise in
the applications introduced in§1 in§6,§7,§8, and§9. In the Appendix, we will explain how the notion of
adaptive submodularity can be extended to handle non-uniform costs (since, e.g., the cost of placing a sensor
at an easily accessible location may be smaller than at a location that is hard to get to).
3.3 Properties of Adaptive Submodular Functions
It can be seen that adaptive monotonicity and adaptive submodularity enjoy similar closure properties as
monotone submodular functions. In particular, if w1,...,w m≥ 0 andf1,...,f m are adaptive monotone
submodular w.r.t. distributionp (φ), thenf(A,φ ) =∑m
i=1wifi(A,φ ) is adaptive monotone submodular w.r.t.
p (φ). Similarly, for a ﬁxed constant c≥ 0 and adaptive monotone submodular function f, the function
g(E,φ ) = min(f(E,φ ),c ) is adaptive monotone submodular. Thus, adaptive monotone submodularity is
preserved by nonnegative linear combinations and by truncation. Adaptive monotone submodularity is also
preserved by restriction, so that iff : 2E×OE→ R≥0 is adaptive monotone submodular w.r.t.p (φ), then for
anye∈E, the functiong : 2E\{e}×OE→ R≥0 deﬁned byg(A,φ ) :=f(A,φ ) for allA⊆E\{e} and all
φ is also adaptive submodular w.r.t.p (φ). Finally, iff : 2E×OE→ R≥0 is adaptive monotone submodular
w.r.t. p (φ) then for each partial realization ψ the conditional function g(A,φ ) := f(A∪ dom(ψ),φ ) is
adaptive monotone submodular w.r.t.p (φ|ψ) := P [Φ =φ| Φ∼ψ].
3.4 What Problem Characteristics Suggest Adaptive Submodularity?
Adaptive submodularity is a diminishing returns property for policies. Speaking informally, it can be applied
in situations where there is an objective function to be optimized does not feature synergies in the beneﬁts
8

of items conditioned on observations. In some cases, the primary objective might not have this property, but
a suitably chosen proxy of it does, as is the case with active learning with persistent noise (Golovin et al.,
2010; Bellala and Scott, 2010). We give example applications in§6 through§9. It is also worth mentioning
where adaptive submodularity is not directly applicable. An extreme example of synergistic effects between
items conditioned on observations is the class of “treasure hunting” instances used to prove Theorem 26 on
page 33, where the (binary) state of certain groups of items encode the treasure’s location in a complex manner.
Another problem feature which adaptive submodularity does not directly address is the possibility that items
selection can alter the underlying realizationφ, as is the case for the problem of optimizing policies for general
POMDPs.
4. The Adaptive Greedy Policy
The classical non-adaptive greedy algorithm (6) has a natural generalization to the adaptive setting. The greedy
policyπgreedy tries, at each iteration, to myopically increase the expected objective value, given its current
observations. That is, supposef : 2E×OE→ R≥0 is the objective, andψ is the partial realization indicating
the states of items selected so far. Then the greedy policy will select the iteme maximizing the expected increase
in value, conditioned on the observed states of items it has already selected (i.e., conditioned onΦ∼ψ). That is,
it will selecte to maximize the conditional expected marginal beneﬁt∆(e|ψ) as deﬁned in Eq. (8). Pseudocode
of the adaptive greedy algorithm is given in Algorithm 1. The only difference to the classic, non-adaptive
greedy algorithm studied by Nemhauser et al. (1978), is Line 1, where an observation Φ(e∗) of the selected
iteme∗ is obtained. Note that the algorithms in this section are presented for Adaptive Stochastic Maximization.
For the coverage objectives, we simply keep selecting items as prescribed byπgreedy until achieving the quota
on objective value (for the min-cost objective) or until we have selected every item (for the min-sum objective).
4.1 Incorporating Item Costs
The adaptive greedy algorithm can be naturally modiﬁed to handle non-uniform item costs by replacing its
selection rule by
e∗∈ arg max
e
∆(e|ψ)
c(e) .
In the following, we will focus on the uniform cost case ( c≡ 1), and defer the analysis with costs to the
Appendix.
4.2 Approximate Greedy Selection
In some applications, ﬁnding an item maximizing ∆(e|ψ) may be computationally intractable, and the best
we can do is ﬁnd anα-approximation to the best greedy selection. This means we ﬁnd an e′ such that
∆(e′|ψ)≥ 1
α max
e
∆(e|ψ).
We call a policy which always selects such an item anα-approximate greedy policy.
4.3 Robustness & Approximate Greedy Selection
As we will show,α-approximate greedy policies have performance guarantees on several problems. The fact
that these performance guarantees of greedy policies are robust to approximate greedy selection suggests a
particular robustness guarantee against incorrect priors p (φ). Speciﬁcally, if our incorrect prior p′ is such
that when we evaluate ∆(e|ψ) we err by a multiplicative factor of at most α, then when we compute the
greedy policy with respect top′ we are actually implementing anα-approximate greedy policy (with respect
to the true prior), and hence obtain the corresponding guarantees. For example, a sufﬁcient condition for
erring by at most a multiplicative factor of α is that there exists c≤ 1 andd≥ 1 withα = d/c such that
cp (φ)≤p′ (φ)≤dp (φ) for allφ, wherep is the true prior.
9

Input: Budgetk; ground setE; distributionp (φ); functionf.
Output: SetA⊆E of sizek
begin
A←∅ ;ψ←∅ ;1
fori = 1 tok do2
foreach e∈E\A do compute ∆(e|ψ) = E [f(A∪{e}, Φ)−f(A, Φ)| Φ∼ψ] ;3
Selecte∗∈ arg maxe ∆(e|ψ);4
SetA←A∪{e∗};5
Observe Φ(e∗); Setψ←ψ∪{ (e∗, Φ(e∗))};6
end
Algorithm 1: The adaptive greedy algorithm, which implements the greedy policy.
4.4 Lazy Evaluations and the Accelerated Adaptive Greedy Algorithm
The deﬁnition of adaptive submodularity allows us to implement an “accelerated” version of the adaptive
greedy algorithm using lazy evaluations of marginal beneﬁts as originally suggested for the non-adaptive case
by Minoux (1978). The idea is as follows. Suppose we run πgreedy under some ﬁxed realizationφ, and select
itemse1,e 2,...,e k. Let ψi :={(ej,φ (ej) :j≤i)} be the partial realizations observed during the run of
πgreedy. The adaptive greedy algorithm computes ∆(e|ψi) for alle∈E and 0≤i<k , unlesse∈ dom(ψi).
Naively, the algorithm thus needs to compute Θ(|E|k) marginal beneﬁts (which can be expensive to compute).
The key insight is thati↦→ ∆(e|ψi) is nonincreasing for alle∈E, because of the adaptive submodularity
of the objective. Hence, if when deciding which item to select as ei we know ∆(e′|ψj)≤ ∆(e|ψi) for
some itemse′ ande andj <i, then we may conclude ∆(e′|ψi)≤ ∆(e|ψi) and hence eliminate the need to
compute ∆(e′|ψi). The accelerated version of the adaptive greedy algorithm exploits this observation in a
principled manner, by computing ∆(e|ψ) for itemse in decreasing order of the upper bounds known on them,
until it ﬁnds an item whose value is at least as great as the upper bounds of all other items. Pseudocode of this
version of the adaptive greedy algorithm is given in Algorithm 2.
In the non-adaptive setting, the use of lazy evaluations has been shown to signiﬁcantly reduce running
times in practice (Leskovec et al., 2007). We evaluated the naive and accelerated implementations of the
adaptive greedy algorithm on two sensor selection problems, and obtained speedup factors that range from
roughly 4 to 40 for those problems. See§10 on page 29 for details.
5. Guarantees for the Greedy Policy
In this section we show that if the objective function is adaptive submodular with respect to the probabilistic
model of the environment in which we operate, then the greedy policy inherits precisely the performance
guarantees of the greedy algorithm for classic (non-adaptive) submodular maximization and submodular
coverage problems, such as Maximum k-Cover and Minimum Set Cover, as well as min-sum submodular
coverage problems, such as Min-Sum Set Cover. In fact, we will show that this holds true more generally:
α–approximate greedy policies inherit precisely the performance guarantees ofα–approximate greedy algo-
rithms for these classic problems. These guarantees suggest that adaptive submodularity is an appropriate
generalization of submodularity to policies. In this section we focus on the unit cost case (i.e., every item
has the same cost). In the Appendix we provide the proofs omitted in this section, and show how our results
extend to non-uniform item costs if we greedily maximize the expected beneﬁt/cost ratio.
5.1 The Maximum Coverage Objective
In this section we consider the maximum coverage objective, where the goal is to selectk items adaptively to
maximize their expected value. The task of maximizing expected value subject to more complex constraints,
10

Input: Budgetk; ground setE; distributionp (φ); functionf.
Output: SetA⊆E of sizek
begin
A←∅ ;ψ←∅ ; Priority QueueQ← EMPTY QUEUE ;1
foreach e∈E doQ. insert(e, +∞);2
fori = 1 tok do3
δmax←−∞ ;emax← NULL ;4
while δmax <Q. maxPriority( ) do5
e←Q. pop( );6
δ← ∆(e|ψ) = E [f(A∪{e}, Φ)−f(A, Φ)| Φ∼ψ];7
Q. insert(e,δ );8
if δmax <δ then9
δmax←δ;emax←e;10
A←A∪{emax};Q. remove(emax);11
Observe Φ(emax); Setψ←ψ∪{ (emax, Φ(emax))};12
end
Algorithm 2: The accelerated version of the adaptive greedy algorithm. Here,Q. insert(e,δ ) insertse
with priorityδ,Q. pop( ) removes and returns the item with greatest priority,Q. maxPriority( ) returns
the maximum priority of the elements inQ, andQ. remove(e) deletese fromQ.
such as matroid constraints and intersections of matroid constraints, is considered in the work of Golovin and
Krause (2011b). Before stating our result, we require the following deﬁnition.
Deﬁnition 4 (Policy Truncation) For a policy π, deﬁne the level-k-truncation π[k] of π to be the policy
obtained by running π until it terminates or until it selects k items, and then terminating. Formally,
dom(π[k]) ={ψ∈ dom(π) : |ψ|<k}, andπ[k](ψ) =π(ψ) for allψ∈ dom(π[k]).
We have the following result, which generalizes the classic result of the work of Nemhauser et al. (1978)
that the greedy algorithm achieves a (1− 1/e)-approximation to the problem of maximizing monotone
submodular functions under a cardinality constraint. By setting𝓁 =k andα = 1 in Theorem 5, we see that
the greedy policy which selectsk items adaptively obtains at least (1− 1/e) of the value of the optimal policy
that selectsk items adaptively, measured with respect tofavg. For a proof see Theorem 38 in Appendix 15.3,
which generalizes Theorem 5 to nonuniform item costs.
Theorem 5 Fix anyα≥ 1. Iff is adaptive monotone and adaptive submodular with respect to the distribution
p (φ), andπ is anα-approximate greedy policy, then for all policiesπ∗ and positive integers𝓁 andk,
favg(π[𝓁])>
(
1−e−𝓁/αk
)
favg(π∗
[k]).
In particular, with𝓁 =k this implies anyα-approximate greedy policy achieves a
(
1−e−1/α)
approximation
to the expected reward of the best policy, if both are terminated after running for an equal number of steps.
If the greedy rule can be implemented only with small absolute error rather than small relative error, i.e.,
∆(e′|ψ)≥ maxe ∆(e|ψ)−ε, an argument similar to that used to prove Theorem 5 shows that
favg(π[𝓁])≥
(
1−e−𝓁/k
)
favg(π∗
[k])−𝓁ε.
This is important, since small absolute error can always be achieved (with high probability) wheneverf can be
evaluated efﬁciently, and samplingp (φ|ψ) is efﬁcient. In this case, we can approximate
∆(e|ψ)≈ 1
N
N∑
i=1
[
f(dom(ψ)∪{e},φi)−f(dom(ψ),φi)
]
,
whereφi are sampled i.i.d. fromp (φ|ψ).
11

5.1.1 D ATA DEPENDENT BOUNDS
For the maximum coverage objective, adaptive submodular functions have another attractive feature: they allow
us to obtain data dependent bounds on the optimum, in a manner similar to the bounds for the non-adaptive
case (Minoux, 1978). Consider the non-adaptive problem of maximizing a monotone submodular function
f : 2A→ R≥0 subject to the constraint|A|≤ k. LetA∗ be an optimal solution, and ﬁx anyA⊆E. Then
f(A∗)≤f(A) + max
B:|B|≤k
∑
e∈B
(f(A∪{e})−f(A)) (12)
because setting B = A∗ we havef(A∗)≤ f(A∪B)≤ f(A) +∑
e∈B (f(A∪{e})−f(A)). Note that
unlike the original objective, we can easily compute maxB:|B|≤k
∑
e∈B (f(A∪{e})−f(A)) by computing
δ(e) :=f(A∪{e})−f(A) for eache, and summing thek largest values. Hence we can quickly compute an
upper bound on our distance from the optimal value,f(A∗)−f(A). In practice, such data-dependent bounds
can be much tighter than the problem-independent performance guarantees of Nemhauser et al. (1978) for
the greedy algorithm (Leskovec et al., 2007). Further note that these bounds hold for any setA, not just sets
selected by the greedy algorithm.
These data dependent bounds have the following analogue for adaptive monotone submodular functions.
See Appendix 15.2 for a proof.
Lemma 6 (The Adaptive Data Dependent Bound) Suppose we have made observationsψ after selecting
dom(ψ). Letπ∗ be any policy such that|E(π∗,φ )|≤ k for allφ. Then for adaptive monotone submodularf
∆(π∗|ψ) ≤ max
A⊆E,|A|≤k
∑
e∈A
∆(e|ψ). (13)
Thus, after running any policyπ, we can efﬁciently compute a bound on the additional beneﬁt that the optimal
solutionπ∗ could obtain beyond the reward ofπ. We do that by computing the conditional expected marginal
beneﬁts for all elementse, and summing thek largest of them. Note that these bounds can be computed on
the ﬂy when running the greedy algorithm, in a similar manner as discussed by Leskovec et al. (2007) for the
non-adaptive setting.
5.2 The Min Cost Cover Objective
Another natural objective is to minimize the number of items selected while ensuring that a sufﬁcient level of
value is obtained. This leads to the Adaptive Stochastic Minimum Cost Coverage problem described in§2,
namelyπ∗∈ arg minπcavg(π) such thatf(E(π,φ ),φ )≥ Q for allφ. Recall that cavg(π) is the expected
cost of π, which in the unit cost case equals the expected number of items selected by π, i.e., cavg(π) :=
E [|E(π, Φ)|]. If the objective is adaptive monotone submodular, this is an adaptive version of the Minimum
Submodular Cover problem (described on line (7) in§3.1). Recall that the greedy algorithm is known to give a
(ln(Q) + 1)-approximation for Minimum Submodular Cover assuming the coverage function is integer-valued
in addition to being monotone submodular (Wolsey, 1982). Adaptive Stochastic Minimum Cost Coverage
is also related to the (Noisy) Interactive Submodular Set Cover problem studied by Guillory and Bilmes
(2010, 2011), which considers the worst-case setting (i.e., there is no distribution over states; instead states
are realized in an adversarial manner). Similar results for active learning have been proved by Kosaraju et al.
(1999) and Dasgupta (2004), as we discuss in more detail in§9.
We assume throughout this section that there exists a quality thresholdQ such thatf(E,φ ) =Q for allφ,
and for allS⊆E and allφ,f(S,φ )≤Q. Note that, as discussed in Section 3, if we replacef(S,φ ) by a new
functiong(S,φ ) = min(f(S,φ ),Q′) for some constantQ′,g will be adaptive submodular iff is. Thus, if
f(E,φ ) varies across realizations, we can instead use the greedy algorithm on the function truncated at some
thresholdQ′≤ minφf(E,φ ) achievable by all realizations.
In contrast to Adaptive Stochastic Maximization, for the coverage problem additional subtleties arise. In
particular, it is not enough that a policyπ achieves valueQ for the true realization; in order forπ to terminate,
it also requires a proof of this fact. Formally, we require thatπ coversf:
12

Deﬁnition 7 (Coverage) Letψ =ψ(π,φ ) be the partial realization encoding all states observed during the
execution ofπ under realizationφ. Givenf : 2E×OE→ R, we say a policyπ coversφ with respect tof if
f(dom(ψ),φ′) =f(E,φ′) for allφ′∼ψ. We say thatπ coversf if it covers every realization with respect to
f.
Coverage is deﬁned in such a way that upon terminating,π might not know which realization is the true one,
but has guaranteed that it has achieved the maximum reward in every possible case (i.e., for every realization
consistent with its observations). We obtain results for both the average and worst-case cost objectives.
5.2.1 M INIMIZING THE AVERAGE COST
Before presenting our approximation guarantee for the Adaptive Stochastic Minimum Cost Coverage, we
introduce a special class of instances, called self–certifying instances. We make this distinction because the
greedy policy has stronger performance guarantees for self–certifying instances, and such instances arise
naturally in applications. For example, the Stochastic Submodular Cover and Stochastic Set Cover instances in
§7, the Adaptive Viral Marketing instances in§8, and the Pool-Based Active Learning instances in§9 are all
self–certifying.
Deﬁnition 8 (Self–Certifying Instances) An instance of Adaptive Stochastic Minimum Cost Coverage is
self–certifying if whenever a policy achieves the maximum possible value for the true realization it immediately
has a proof of this fact. Formally, an instance (f,p (φ)) is self–certifying if for all φ,φ′, and ψ such that
φ∼ψ andφ′∼ψ, we havef(dom(ψ),φ ) =f(E,φ ) if and only iff(dom(ψ),φ′) =f(E,φ′).
One class of self–certifying instances which commonly arise are those in which f(A,φ ) depends only
on the state of items inA, and in which there is a uniform maximum amount of reward that can be obtained
across realizations. Formally, we have the following observation.
Proposition 9 Fix an instance (f,p (φ)). If there existsQ such thatf(E,φ ) =Q for allφ and there exists
some g : 2E×O → R≥0 such that f(A,φ ) = g ({(e,φ (e)) :e∈A}) for all A and φ, then (f,p (φ)) is
self–certifying.
Proof Fixφ,φ′, andψ such thatφ∼ψ andφ′∼ψ. Assuming the existence ofg and treatingψ as a relation,
we have f(dom(ψ),φ ) = g(ψ) = f(dom(ψ),φ′). Hence f(dom(ψ),φ ) = Q = f(E,φ ) if and only if
f(dom(ψ),φ′) =Q =f(E,φ′).
For our results on minimum cost coverage, we also need a stronger monotonicity condition and a stronger
submodularity condition:
Deﬁnition 10 (Strong Adaptive Monotonicity) A functionf : 2E×OE→ R is strongly adaptive monotone
with respect top (φ) if, informally “selecting more items never hurts” with respect to the expected reward.
Formally, for allψ, alle /∈ dom(ψ), and all possible outcomeso∈O such that P [Φ(e) =o | Φ∼ψ]> 0,
we require
E [f(dom(ψ), Φ) | Φ∼ψ]≤ E [f(dom(ψ)∪{e}, Φ) | Φ∼ψ, Φ(e) =o] . (14)
Strong adaptive monotonicity implies adaptive monotonicity, as the latter means that “selecting more items
never hurts in expectation,” i.e.,
E [f(dom(ψ), Φ) | Φ∼ψ]≤ E [f(dom(ψ)∪{e}, Φ) | Φ∼ψ].
To deﬁne strong adaptive submodularity, we ﬁrst need the following extension of∆(e|ψ):
Deﬁnition 11 (Conditional Expected Marginal Beneﬁt (Extended version)) Given partial realizations
ψ⊆ψ′, let
∆(e|ψ;ψ′) := E
[
f(dom(ψ)∪{e}, Φ)−f(dom(ψ), Φ)
⏐⏐⏐⏐ Φ∼ψ′
]
(15)
13

Deﬁnition 12 (Strong Adaptive Submodularity) A function f : 2E×OE → R≥0 is strongly adaptive
submodular with respect to distributionp (φ) if it is adaptive submodular and moreover the expected marginal
beneﬁt of any ﬁxed item does not increase as more items are selected and their states are observed, conditioned
on the (item, observation) pairs. Formally,f is adaptive submodular w.r.t.p (φ) if for allψ andψ′ such that
ψ is a subrealization ofψ′ (i.e.,ψ⊆ψ′), and for alle∈E\ dom(ψ′), we have
∆(e|ψ;ψ′)≥ ∆(e|ψ′). (16)
In other words, conditioning onψ′, adding items dom(ψ′)\ dom(ψ) cannot increase the expected marginal
beneﬁt ofe.
A sufﬁcient condition for strong adaptive submodularity with respect to p (φ) is that the function be
adaptive submodular and pointwise submodular (i.e.,f(A,φ ) is submodular in A for any ﬁxed φ), as we
prove in Appendix 15.4. It is worth noting that pointwise submodularity is not sufﬁcient to establish adaptive
submodularity. A simple counterexample is f(S,φ ) =|{e :e∈S,φ (e) = 1}| , with p (φ) = 1/2 if∀e∈
E, φ(e) = 1 andp (φ) = 1/2 if∀e∈E, φ(e) = 0. In that case, ∆(e|∅) = 1/2 yet ∆(e|{(e′, 1)}) = 1 for
anye′⁄=e.
We now state our main result for the average case costcavg(π):
Theorem 13 Supposef : 2E×OE→ R≥0 is strongly adaptive submodular and strongly adaptive monotone
with respect to p (φ) and there exists Q such that f(E,φ ) = Q for all φ. Let η be any value such that
f(S,φ )>Q−η impliesf(S,φ ) =Q for allS andφ. Letδ = minφp (φ) be the minimum probability of any
realization. Letπ∗
avg be an optimal policy minimizing the expected number of items selected to guarantee every
realization is covered. Letπ be anα-approximate greedy policy with respect to the item costs. Then in general
cavg(π)≤αc avg(π∗
avg)
(
ln
(Q
δη
)
+ 1
)2
and for self–certifying instances
cavg(π)≤αc avg(π∗
avg)
(
ln
(Q
η
)
+ 1
)2
.
Note that if range(f)⊂ Z, thenη = 1 is a valid choice, so for general and self–certifying instances we have
cavg(π)≤αc avg(π∗
avg) (ln(Q/δ) + 1)2 andcavg(π)≤αc avg(π∗
avg) (ln(Q) + 1)2, respectively.
Historical Note: An earlier version of Theorem 13 claimed logarithmic approximation factors rather than
the squared–logarithmic factors present here. Unfortunately, the proof was ﬂawed as pointed out by Nan
and Saligrama (2017). Determining whether the logarithmic bounds hold remains an interesting open
problem. In particular, it remains open whethercavg(π)≤αc avg(π∗
avg)
(
ln
(
Q
δη
)
+ 1
)
for general instances
and cavg(π)≤ αc avg(π∗
avg)
(
ln
(
Q
η
)
+ 1
)
for self–certifying instances under the conditions speciﬁed by
Theorem 13. It also remains open whether the strong adaptive submodularity condition is required.
5.2.2 M INIMIZING THE WORST-C ASE COST
For the worst-case costcwc(π) := maxφ|E(π,φ )|, strong adaptive monotonicity and strong submodularity
are not required; adaptive monotonicity and adaptive submodularity sufﬁce. We obtain the following result.
Theorem 14 Supposef : 2E×OE→ R≥0 is adaptive monotone and adaptive submodular with respect to
p (φ), and letη be any value such thatf(S,φ )>f (E,φ )−η impliesf(S,φ ) =f(E,φ ) for allS andφ. Let
δ = minφp (φ) be the minimum probability of any realization. Letπ∗
wc be the optimal policy minimizing the
worst-case number of queries to guarantee every realization is covered. Letπ be anα-approximate greedy
policy. Finally, letQ := E [f(E,φ )] be the maximum possible expected reward. Then
cwc(π)≤αc wc(π∗
wc)
(
ln
(Q
δη
)
+ 1
)
.
14

The proofs of Theorems 13 and 14 are given in Appendix 15.4.
Thus, even though adaptive submodularity is deﬁned w.r.t. a particular distribution, perhaps surprisingly,
the adaptive greedy algorithm is competitive even in the case of adversarially chosen realizations, against a
policy optimized to minimize the worst-case cost. Theorem 14 therefore suggests that if we do not have a
strong prior, we can obtain the strongest guarantees if we choose a distribution that is “as uniform as possible”
(i.e., maximizesδ) while still guaranteeing adaptive submodularity.
5.2.3 D ISCUSSION
Note that the approximation factor for self–certifying instances in Theorem 14 reduces to the (ln(Q) + 1)-
approximation guarantee for the greedy algorithm for Set Cover instances with Q elements, in the case of
a deterministic distribution p (φ). Moreover, with a deterministic distribution p (φ) there is no distinction
between average-case and worst-case cost. Hence, an immediate corollary of the result of Feige (1998)
mentioned in§3 is that for every constantϵ> 0 there is no polynomial time (1−ϵ) ln (Q/η) approximation
algorithm for self–certifying instances of Adaptive Stochastic Min Cost Cover, under either thecavg(·) or the
cwc(·) objective, unless NP⊆ DTIME(nO(log logn)). It remains open to determine whether or not Adaptive
Stochastic Min Cost Cover with the worst-case cost objective admits a ln (Q/η) + 1 approximation for
self–certifying instances via a polynomial time algorithm, and in particular whether the greedy policy has
such an approximation guarantee. However, in Lemma 50 we show that Feige’s result also implies there is
no (1−ϵ) ln (Q/δη) polynomial time approximation algorithm for general (non self-certifying) instances of
Adaptive Stochastic Min Cost Cover under either objective, unless NP⊆ DTIME(nO(log logn)). In that sense,
Theorem 14 is best-possible and Theorem 13 cannot be improved by more than a logarithmic factor and under
reasonable complexity-theoretic assumptions.
5.3 The Min-Sum Cover Objective
Yet another natural objective is the min-sum objective, in which an unrealized reward ofx incurs a cost ofx in
each time step, and the goal is to minimize the total cost incurred.
5.3.1 B ACKGROUND ON THE NON-ADAPTIVE MIN-SUM COVER PROBLEM
In the non-adaptive setting, perhaps the simplest form of a coverage problem with this objective is theMin-Sum
Set Cover problem (Feige et al., 2004) in which the input is a set system (U,S), the output is a permutation of
the sets⟨S1,S 2,...,S m⟩, and the goal is to minimize the sum of element coverage times, where the coverage
time of u is the index of the ﬁrst set that contains it (e.g., it is j ifu∈ Sj andu /∈ Si for all i < j). In
this problem and its generalizations the min-sum objective is useful in modeling processing costs in certain
applications, for example in ordering diagnostic tests to identify a disease cheaply (Kaplan et al., 2005), in
ordering multiple ﬁlters to be applied to database records while processing a query (Munagala et al., 2005),
or in ordering multiple heuristics to run on boolean satisﬁability instances as a means to solve them faster in
practice (Streeter and Golovin, 2008). A particularly expressive generalization of min-sum set cover has been
studied under the names Min-Sum Submodular Cover (Streeter and Golovin, 2008) andL1-Submodular Set
Cover (Golovin et al., 2008). The former paper extends the greedy algorithm to a natural online variant of the
problem, while the latter studies a parameterized family ofLp-Submodular Set Cover problems in which the
objective is analogous to minimizing theLp norm of the coverage times for Min-Sum Set Cover instances. In
the Min-Sum Submodular Cover problem, there is a monotone submodular functionf : 2E→ R≥0 deﬁning
the reward obtained from a collection of elements5. There is an integral costc(e) for each element, and the
output is a sequence of all of the elements σ =⟨e1,e 2,...,e n⟩. For each t∈ R≥0, we deﬁne the set of
5. To encode Min-Sum Set Cover instance(U,S), letE :=S andf (A) :=|∪ e∈Ae|, where eache∈E is a subset of elements inU.
15

elements in the sequenceσ within a budget oft:
σ[t] :=


ei :
∑
j≤i
c(ej)≤t


.
The cost we wish to minimize is then
cΣ(σ) :=
∞∑
t=0
(
f(E)−f(σ[t])
)
. (17)
Feige et al. (2004) proved that for Min-Sum Set cover, the greedy algorithm achieves a4-approximation to
the minimum cost, and also that this is optimal in the sense that no polynomial time algorithm can achieve
a (4−ϵ)-approximation, for anyϵ> 0, unless P = NP. Interestingly, the greedy algorithm also achieves a
4-approximation for the more general Min-Sum Submodular Cover problem as well (Streeter and Golovin,
2008; Golovin et al., 2008).
5.3.2 T HE ADAPTIVE STOCHASTIC MIN-SUM COVER PROBLEM
In this article, we extend the result of Streeter and Golovin (2008) and Golovin et al. (2008) to an adaptive
version of Min-Sum Submodular Cover. For clarity’s sake we will consider the unit-cost case here (i.e.,
c(e) = 1 for alle); we show how to extend adaptive submodularity to handle general costs in the Appendix. In
the adaptive version of the problem,π[t] plays the role ofσ[t], andfavg plays the role off. The goal is to ﬁnd a
policyπ minimizing
cΣ(π) :=
∞∑
t=0
(
E [f(E, Φ)]−favg(π[t])
)
=
∑
φ
p (φ)
∞∑
t=0
(
f(E,φ )−f(E(π[t],φ ),φ )
)
. (18)
We call this problem the Adaptive Stochastic Min-Sum Cover problem. The key difference between this
objective and the minimum cost cover objective is that here, the cost at each step is only the fractional extent
that we have not covered the true realization, whereas in the minimum cost cover objective we are charged
in full in each step until we have completely covered the true realization (according to Deﬁnition 7). We
prove the following result for the Adaptive Stochastic Min-Sum Cover problem with arbitrary item costs in
Appendix 15.5.
Theorem 15 Fix any α ≥ 1. If f is adaptive monotone and adaptive submodular with respect to the
distributionp (φ),π is anα-approximate greedy policy with respect to the item costs, andπ∗ is any policy,
thencΣ(π)≤ 4αc Σ(π∗).
6. Application: Stochastic Submodular Maximization
As our ﬁrst application, consider the sensor placement problem introduced in§1. Suppose we would like to
monitor a spatial phenomenon such as temperature in a building. We discretize the environment into a setE of
locations. We would like to pick a subsetA⊆E ofk locations that is most “informative”, where we use a set
function ˆf(A) to quantify the informativeness of placementA. Krause and Guestrin (2007) show that many
natural objective functions (such as reduction in predictive uncertainty measured in terms of Shannon entropy
with conditionally independent observations) are monotone submodular.
Now consider the problem, where the informativeness of a sensor is unknown before deployment (e.g.,
when deploying cameras for surveillance, the location of objects and their associated occlusions may not be
known in advance, or varying amounts of noise may reduce the sensing range). We can model this extension by
assigning a stateφ(e)∈O to each possible location, indicating the extent to which a sensor placed at location
e is working. To quantify the value of a set of sensor deployments under a realizationφ indicating to what
16

extent the various sensors are working, we ﬁrst deﬁne (e,o ) for eache∈E ando∈O, which represents the
placement of a sensor at locatione which is in stateo. We then suppose there is a function ˆf : 2E×O→ R≥0
which quantiﬁes the informativeness of a set of sensor deployments in arbitrary states. (Note ˆf is a set function
taking a set of (sensor deployment, state) pairs as input.) The utilityf(A,φ ) of placing sensors at the locations
inA under realizationφ is then
f(A,φ ) := ˆf({(e,φ (e)) :e∈A}).
We aim to adaptively placek sensors to maximize our expected utility. We assume that sensor failures at
each location are independent of each other, i.e., P [Φ =φ] =∏
e∈E P [Φ(e) =φ(e)], where P [φ(e) =o] is
the probability that a sensor placed at locatione will be in stateo. Asadpour et al. (2008) studied a special
case of our problem, in which sensors either fail completely (in which case they contribute no value at all)
or work perfectly, under the name Stochastic Submodular Maximization. They proved that the adaptive greedy
algorithm obtains a(1−1/e) approximation to the optimal adaptive policy, providedˆf is monotone submodular.
We extend their result to multiple types of failures by showing thatf(A,φ ) is adaptive submodular with respect
to distributionp (φ) and then invoking Theorem 5. Fig. 2 illustrates an instance of Stochastic Submodular
Maximization wheref(A,φ ) is the cardinality of union of sets index byA and parameterized byφ.
Theorem 16 Fix a prior such that P [Φ =φ] =∏
e∈E P [Φ(e) =φ(e)] and an integerk, and let the objective
function ˆf : 2E×O→ R≥0 be monotone submodular. Letπ be anyα-approximate greedy policy attempting to
maximizef, and letπ∗ be any policy. Then for all positive integers𝓁,
favg(π[𝓁])≥
(
1−e−𝓁/αk
)
favg(π∗
[k]).
In particular, ifπ is the greedy policy (i.e.,α = 1) and𝓁 =k, thenfavg(π[k])≥
(
1− 1
e
)
favg(π∗
[k]).
Proof We prove Theorem 16 by ﬁrst proving f is adaptive monotone and adaptive submodular in this
model, and then applying Theorem 5. Adaptive monotonicity is readily proved after observing that f(·,φ )
is monotone for each φ. Moving on to adaptive submodularity, ﬁx any ψ,ψ′ such that ψ⊆ ψ′ and any
e /∈ dom(ψ′). We aim to show ∆(e|ψ′)≤ ∆(e|ψ). Intuitively, this is clear, as ∆(e|ψ′) is the expected
marginal beneﬁt of addinge to a larger base set than is the case with ∆(e|ψ), namely dom(ψ′) as compared
to dom(ψ), and the realizations are independent. To prove it rigorously, we deﬁne a coupled distribution
µ over pairs of realizations φ∼ ψ andφ′∼ ψ′ such that φ(e′) = φ′(e′) for all e′ /∈ dom(ψ′). Formally,
µ(φ,φ′) = ∏
e∈E\dom(ψ) P [Φ(e) =φ(e)] ifφ∼ ψ, φ′∼ ψ′, and φ(e′) = φ′(e′) for all e′ /∈ dom(ψ′);
otherwiseµ(φ,φ′) = 0. (Note that µ(φ,φ′)> 0 impliesφ(e′) = φ′(e′) for alle′∈ dom(ψ) as well, since
φ∼ ψ, φ′∼ ψ′, and ψ⊆ ψ′.) Also note that p (φ|ψ) = ∑
φ′µ(φ,φ′) andp (φ′|ψ′) = ∑
φµ(φ,φ′).
Calculating ∆(e|ψ′) and ∆(e|ψ) usingµ, we see that for any (φ,φ′) in the support ofµ,
f(dom(ψ′)∪{e},φ′)−f(dom(ψ′),φ′) = ˆf(ψ′∪{ (e,φ′(e))})− ˆf(ψ′))
≤ ˆf(ψ∪{ (e,φ (e))})− ˆf(ψ))
= f(dom(ψ)∪{e},φ )−f(dom(ψ),φ )
from the submodularity of ˆf. Hence
∆(e|ψ′) = ∑
(φ,φ′)µ(φ,φ′) (f(dom(ψ′)∪{e},φ′)−f(dom(ψ′),φ′))
≤ ∑
(φ,φ′)µ(φ,φ′) (f(dom(ψ)∪{e},φ )−f(dom(ψ),φ )) = ∆( e|ψ)
which completes the proof.
17

Figure 2: Illustration of part of a Stochastic Set Cover instance. Shown are the supports of two distributions
over sets, indexed by itemse (marked in blue) ande′ (yellow).
7. Application: Stochastic Submodular Coverage
Suppose that instead of wishing to adaptively place k unreliable sensors to maximize the utility of the
information obtained, as discussed in§6, we have a quota on utility and wish to adaptively place the minimum
number of unreliable sensors to achieve this quota. This amounts to a minimum-cost coverage version of
the Stochastic Submodular Maximization problem introduced in§6, which we call Stochastic Submodular
Coverage.
As in§6, in the Stochastic Submodular Coverage problem we suppose there is a functionˆf : 2E×O→ R≥0
which quantiﬁes the utility of a set of sensors in arbitrary states. Also, the states of each sensor are independent,
so that P [Φ =φ] =∏
e∈E P [Φ(e) =φ(e)]. The goal is to obtain a quota Q of utility at minimum cost. Thus,
we deﬁne our objective asf(A,φ ) := min
{
Q, ˆf({(e,φ (e)) :e∈A})
}
, and want to ﬁnd a policyπ covering
every realization and minimizingcavg(π) := E [|E(π, Φ)|]. We additionally assume that this quota can always
be obtained using sufﬁciently many sensor placements; formally, this amounts tof(E,φ ) =Q for allφ. We
obtain the following result, whose proof we defer until the end of this section.
Theorem 17 Fix a prior with independent sensor states s.t. P [Φ =φ] =∏
e∈E P [Φ(e) =φ(e)], and let ˆf :
2E×O→ R≥0 be a mon. submodular function. FixQ∈ R≥0 s.t.f(A,φ ) := min
(
Q, ˆf({(e,φ (e)) :e∈A})
)
satisﬁesf(E,φ ) =Q for allφ. Letη be any value such thatf(S,φ )>Q −η impliesf(S,φ ) =Q for allS
andφ. Finally, letπ be anα-approximate greedy policy for maximizingf, and letπ∗ be any policy. Then
cavg(π)≤αc avg(π∗)
(
ln
(Q
η
)
+ 1
)2
.
7.1 A Special Case: The Stochastic Set Coverage Problem
The Stochastic Submodular Coverage problem is a generalization of theStochastic Set Coverageproblem (Goe-
mans and V ondr´ak, 2006). In Stochastic Set Coverage the underlying submodular objective ˆf is the number
of elements covered in some input set system. In other words, there is a ground set U ofn elements to be
covered, and itemsE such that each iteme is associated with a distribution over subsets ofU. When an item
is selected, a set is sampled from its distribution, as illustrated in Fig. 2. The problem is to adaptively select
items until all elements ofU are covered by sampled sets, while minimizing the expected number of items
selected. Like us, Goemans and V ondr´ak also assume that the subsets are sampled independently for each
item, and every element ofU can be covered in every realization, so thatf(E,φ ) =|U| for allφ.
Goemans and V ondr´ak primarily investigated the adaptivity gap (quantifying how much adaptive policies
can outperform non-adaptive policies) of Stochastic Set Coverage, for variants in which items can be repeatedly
18

selected or not, and prove adaptivity gaps of Θ(logn) in the former case, and between Ω(n) andO(n2) in
the latter. They also provide an n-approximation algorithm. More recently, Liu et al. (2008) considered
a special case of Stochastic Set Coverage in which each item may be in one of two states. They were
motivated by a streaming database problem, in which a collection of queries sharing common ﬁlters must all
be evaluated on a stream element. They transform the problem to a Stochastic Set Coverage instance in which
(ﬁlter, query) pairs are to be covered by ﬁlter evaluations; which pairs are covered by a ﬁlter depends on the
(binary) outcome of evaluating it on the stream element. The resulting instances satisfy the assumption that
every element ofU can be covered in every realization. They study, among other algorithms, the adaptive
greedy algorithm specialized to this setting, and show that if the subsets are sampled independently for
each item, so that P [Φ =φ] = ∏
e P [Φ(e) =φ(e)], then it is anHn :=∑n
x=1
1
x approximation. (Recall
ln(n)≤H n≤ ln(n) + 1 for alln≥ 1.) Moreover, Liu et al. report that it empirically outperforms a number
of other algorithms in their experiments.
The adaptive submodularity framework allows us to prove approximate results for richer item distributions
over subsets ofU than considered by Liu et al. (2008) as a corollary of Theorem 17. Speciﬁcally, we obtain a
(ln(n) + 1)2-approximation for the Stochastic Set Coverage problem with arbitrarily many outcomes for each
stochastic set, wheren :=|U|.
We model the Stochastic Set Coverage problem by lettingφ(e)⊆U indicate the random set sampled from
e’s distribution. Since the sampled sets are independent we haveP [Φ =φ] =∏
e P [Φ(e) =φ(e)]. For any
A⊆E letf(A,φ ) :=|∪e∈Aφ(e)| be the number of elements ofU covered by the sets sampled from items
inA. As in the previous work mentioned above, we assume f(E,φ ) = n for allφ. Therefore we may set
Q =n. Since the range off includes only integers, we may setη = 1. Applying Theorem 17 then yields the
following result.
Corollary 18 The adaptive greedy algorithm achieves a (ln(n) + 1)2-approximation for Stochastic Set
Coverage, wheren :=|U| is the size of the ground set.
We now provide the proof of Theorem 17.
Proof of Theorem 17: We will ultimately prove Theorem 17 by applying the bound from Theorem 13 for
Stochastic Submodular Cover instances.
The proof mostly consists of justifying this application. Without loss of generality we may assume ˆf is
truncated atQ, otherwise we may use ˆg(S) = min
{
Q, ˆf(S)
}
in lieu of ˆf. This removes the need to truncate
f. Since we established the adaptive submodularity of f in the proof of Theorem 16, and by assumption
f(E,φ ) = Q for allφ, to apply Theorem 13 we need only show that f is strongly adaptive monotone and
strongly adaptive submodular and that the instances under consideration are self–certifying.
We begin by showing the strong adaptive monotonicity off. Fix a partial realizationψ, an iteme /∈ dom(ψ)
and a stateo. Letψ′ =ψ∪{ (e,o )}. Then treatingψ andψ′ as subsets ofE×O, and using the monotonicity
of ˆf, we obtain
E [f(dom(ψ), Φ)| Φ∼ψ] = ˆf(ψ)≤ ˆf(ψ′)≤ E [f(dom(ψ′), Φ)| Φ∼ψ′],
which is equivalent to the strong adaptive monotonicity condition.
Next we show the strong adaptive adaptive submodularity of f by showing it is pointwise submod-
ular (having already proven adaptive submodularity for it). This is clearly true, since for all φ, S ↦→
ˆf({(e,φ (e)) :e∈S}) is monotone submodular by assumption.
Finally we prove that these instances are self–certifying. Consider anyψ andφ,φ′ consistent withψ. Then
f(dom(ψ),φ ) = ˆf(ψ) =f(dom(ψ),φ′).
Sincef(E,φ ) =f(E,φ′) =Q by assumption, it follows thatf(dom(ψ),φ ) =f(E,φ ) ifff(dom(ψ),φ′) =
f(E,φ′), so the instance is self–certifying.
We have shown thatf andp (φ) satisfy the assumptions of Theorem 13 on this self–certifying instance.
Hence we may apply it to obtain the claimed approximation guarantee. ■
19

Figure 3: Illustration of the Adaptive Viral Marketing problem. Left: the underlying social network. Middle:
the people inﬂuenced and the observations obtained after one person is selected.
8. Application: Adaptive Viral Marketing
For our next application, consider the following scenario. Suppose we would like to generate demand for a
genuinely novel product. Potential customers do not realize how valuable the new product will be to them, and
conventional advertisements are failing to convince them to try it. In this case, we may try to spur demand by
offering a special promotional deal to a select few people, and hope that demand builds virally, propagating
through the social network as people recommend the product to their friends and associates. Supposing we
know something about the structure of the social networks people inhabit, and how ideas, innovation, and new
product adoption diffuse through them, this begs the question: to which initial set of people should we offer
the promotional deal, in order to spur maximum demand for our product?
This, broadly, is the viral marketing problem. The same problem arises in the context of spreading
technological, cultural, and intellectual innovations, broadly construed. In the interest of uniﬁed terminology
we follow Kempe et al. (2003) and talk of spreadinginﬂuence through the social network, where we say people
are active if they have adopted the idea or innovation in question, and inactive otherwise, and thata inﬂuences
b ifa convincesb to adopt the idea or innovation in question.
There are many ways to model the diffusion dynamics governing the spread of inﬂuence in a social network.
We consider a basic and well-studied model, theindependent cascade model, described in detail below. For this
model Kempe et al. (2003) obtain a very interesting result; they show that the eventual spread of the inﬂuence
f (i.e., the ultimate number of customers that demand the product) is a monotone submodular function of the
seed setS of people initially selected. This, in conjunction with the results of Nemhauser et al. (1978) implies
that the greedy algorithm obtains at least
(
1− 1
e
)
of the value of the best feasible seed set of size at mostk,
i.e., arg maxS:|S|≤kf(S), where we interpretk as the budget for the promotional campaign. Though Kempe
et al. consider only the maximum coverage version of the viral marketing problem, their result in conjunction
with that of Wolsey (1982) also implies that the greedy algorithm will obtain a quotaQ of value at a cost of
at most ln(Q) + 1 times the cost of the optimal set arg minS{c(S) :f(S)≥Q} iff takes on only integral
values.
8.1 Adaptive Viral Marketing
The viral marketing problem has a very natural adaptive analog. Instead of selecting a ﬁxed set of people
in advance, we may select a person to offer the promotion to, make some observations about the resulting
spread of demand for our product, and repeat. See Fig. 3 for an illustration. In §8.2, we use the idea of
20

adaptive submodularity to obtain results analogous to those of Kempe et al. (2003) in the adaptive setting.
Speciﬁcally, we show that the greedy policy obtains at least
(
1− 1
e
)
of the value of the best policy. Moreover,
we extend this result by achieving that guarantee not only for the case where our reward is simply the number
of inﬂuenced people, but also for any (nonnegative) monotone submodular function of the set of people
inﬂuenced. In§8.3 we consider the minimum cost cover objective, and show that the greedy policy obtains a
squared logarithmic approximation for it. To our knowledge, no approximation results for this adaptive variant
of the viral marketing problem have been known.
8.1.1 I NDEPENDENT CASCADE MODEL
In this model, the social network is a directed graph G = (V,A ) where each vertex in V is a person, and
each edge (u,v )∈A has an associated binary random variableXuv indicating ifu will inﬂuencev. That is,
Xuv = 1 ifu will inﬂuencev once it has been inﬂuenced, andXuv = 0 otherwise. The random variablesXuv
are independent, and have known meanspuv := E [Xuv]. We will call an edge (u,v ) withXuv = 1 a live
edge and an edge withXuv = 0 a dead edge. When a node u is activated, the edgesXuv to each neighbor
v ofu are sampled, andv is activated if (u,v ) is live. Inﬂuence can then spread fromu’s neighbors to their
neighbors, and so on, according to the same process. Once active, nodes remain active throughout the process,
however Kempe et al. (2003) show that this assumption is without loss of generality, and can be removed.
8.1.2 T HE FEEDBACK MODEL
In the Adaptive Viral Marketing problem under the independent cascades model, the items correspond to
people we can activate by offering them the promotional deal. How we deﬁne the states φ(u) depends on
what information we obtain as a result of activatingu. Given the nature of the diffusion process, activating
u can have wide-ranging effects, so the state φ(u) has more to do with the state of the social network on
the whole than with u in particular. Speciﬁcally, we model φ(u) as a function φu : A→{ 0, 1, ?}, where
φu((u,v )) = 0 means that activatingu has revealed that (u,v ) is dead,φu((u,v )) = 1 means that activating
u has revealed that (u,v ) is live, and φu((u,v )) = ? means that activating u has not revealed the status
of (u,v ) (i.e., the value of Xuv). We require each realization to be consistent and complete. Consistency
means that no edge should be declared both live and dead by any two states. That is, for all u,v ∈ V and
a∈ A, (φu(a),φv(a)) /∈{ (0, 1), (1, 0)}. Completeness means that the status of each edge is revealed by
some activation. That is, for alla∈A there existsu∈V such thatφu(a)∈{ 0, 1}. A consistent and complete
realization thus encodesXuv for each edge (u,v ). LetA(φ) denote the live edges as encoded byφ. There are
several candidates for which edge sets we are allowed to observe when activating a nodeu. Here we consider
what we call the Full-Adoption Feedback Model: After activatingu we get to see the status (live or dead) of all
edges exitingv, for all nodesv reachable fromu via live edges (i.e., reachable fromu in (V,A (φ)), whereφ
is the true realization. We illustrate the full-adoption feedback model in Fig. 3.
8.1.3 T HE OBJECTIVE FUNCTION
In the simplest case, the reward for inﬂuencing a set U⊆V of nodes is ˆf(U) :=|U|. Kempe et al. (2003)
obtain an
(
1− 1
e
)
-approximation for the slightly more general case in which each nodeu has a weightwu
indicating its importance, and the reward is ˆf(U) :=∑
u∈Uwu. We generalize this result further, to include
arbitrary nonnegative monotone submodular reward functions ˆf. This allows us, for example, to encode a value
associated with the diversity of the set of nodes inﬂuenced, such as the notion that it is better to achieve 20%
market penetration in ﬁve different (equally important) demographic segments than 100% market penetration
in one and 0% in the others.
8.2 Guarantees for the Maximum Coverage Objective
We are now ready to formally state our result for the maximum coverage objective.
21

Theorem 19 The greedy policyπgreedy obtains at least
(
1− 1
e
)
of the value of the best policy for the Adaptive
Viral Marketing problem with arbitrary monotone submodular reward functions, in the independent cascade
and full-adoption feedback models discussed above. That is, ifσ(S,φ ) is the set of all activated nodes whenS
is the seed set of activated nodes andφ is the realization, ˆf : 2V → R≥0 is an arbitrary monotone submodular
function indicating the reward for inﬂuencing a set, and the objective function isf(S,φ ) := ˆf(σ(S,φ )), then
for all policiesπ and allk∈ N we have
favg(πgreedy
[k] )≥
(
1− 1
e
)
favg(π[k]).
More generally, ifπ is anα-approximate greedy policy then∀𝓁∈ N,favg(π[𝓁])≥
(
1−e−𝓁/αk)
favg(π∗
[k]).
Proof Adaptive monotonicity follows immediately from the fact thatf(·,φ ) is monotonic for eachφ. It thus
sufﬁces to prove thatf is adaptive submodular with respect to the probability distribution on realizationsp (φ),
because then we can invoke Theorem 5 to complete the proof.
We will say we have observed an edge (u,v ) if we know its status, i.e., if it is live or dead. Fix anyψ,ψ′
such thatψ⊆ψ′ and anyv /∈ dom(ψ′). We must show ∆(v|ψ′)≤ ∆(v|ψ). To prove this rigorously, we de-
ﬁne a coupled distributionµ over pairs of realizationsφ∼ψ andφ′∼ψ′. Note that given the feedback model,
the realizationφ is a function of the random variables{Xuw : (u,w )∈A} indicating the status of each edge.
For conciseness we use the notationX ={Xuw : (u,w )∈A}. We deﬁneµ implicitly in terms of a joint distri-
bution ˆµ on X× X′, whereφ =φ(X) andφ′ =φ′(X′) are the realizations induced by the two distinct sets of
random edge statuses, respectively. Henceµ(φ(X),φ (X′)) = ˆµ(X, X′). Next, let us say a partial realizationψ
observes an edgee if somew∈ dom(ψ) has revealed its status as being live or dead. For edges(u,w ) observed
byψ, the random variableXuw is deterministically set to the status observed byψ. Similarly, for edges (u,w )
observed byψ′, the random variableX′
uw is deterministically set to the status observed byψ′. Note that since
ψ⊆ψ′, the state of all edges which are observed byψ are the same inφ andφ′. All (X, X′)∈ support(ˆµ)
have these properties. Additionally, we will construct ˆµ so that the status of all edges which are unobserved by
bothψ′ andψ are the same inX and X′, meaningXuw =X′
uw for all such edges(u,w ), or else ˆµ(X, X′) = 0.
The above constraints leave us with the following degrees of freedom: we may select Xuw for all
(u,w )∈A which are unobserved byψ. We select them independently, such that E [Xuw] =puw as with the
priorp (φ). Hence for all (X, X′) satisfying the above constraints,
ˆµ(X, X′) =
∏
(u,w) unobserved byψ
pXuw
uw (1−puw)1−Xuw
,
and otherwise ˆµ(X, X′) = 0. Note that p (φ|ψ) =∑
φ′µ(φ,φ′) andp (φ′|ψ′) =∑
φµ(φ,φ′). We next
claim that for all (φ,φ′)∈ support(µ)
f(dom(ψ′)∪{v},φ′)−f(dom(ψ′),φ′) ≤ f(dom(ψ)∪{v},φ )−f(dom(ψ),φ ). (19)
Recallf(S,φ ) := ˆf(σ(S,φ )), whereσ(S,φ ) is the set of all activated nodes whenS is the seed set of activated
nodes andφ is the realization. LetB =σ(dom(ψ),φ ) andC =σ(dom(ψ)∪{v},φ ) denote the active nodes
before and after selectingv after dom(ψ) under realizationsφ, and similarly deﬁneB′ andC′ with respect toψ′
andφ′. LetD :=C\B,D′ :=C′\B′. Then Eq. (19) is equivalent to ˆf(B′∪D′)− ˆf(B′)≤ ˆf(B∪D)− ˆf(B).
By the submodularity of ˆf, it sufﬁces to show thatB⊆B′ andD′⊆D to prove the above inequality, which
we will now do.
We start by proving B⊆ B′. Fix w∈ B. Then there exists a path from some u∈ dom(ψ) tow in
(V,A (φ)). Moreover, every edge in this path is not only live but also observed to be live, by deﬁnition of the
feedback model. Since (φ,φ′)∈ support(µ), this implies that every edge in this path is also live underφ′, as
edges observed byψ must have the same status under bothφ andφ′. It follows that there is a path fromu tow
in (V,A (φ′)). Sinceu is clearly also in dom(ψ′), we concludew∈B′, henceB⊆B′.
Next we showD′⊆D. Fix somew∈D′ and suppose by way of contradiction thatw /∈D. Hence there
exists a pathP fromv tow in (V,A (φ′)) but no such path exists in (V,A (φ)). The edges of P are all live
22

underφ′, and at least one must be dead underφ. Let (u,u′) be such an edge inP . Because the status of this
edge differs inφ andφ′, and (φ,φ′)∈ support(µ), it must be that (u,u′) is observed byψ′ but not observed
byψ. Because it is observed byψ′, in our feedback model it must be thatu is active after dom(ψ′) is selected,
i.e.,u∈B′. However, this implies that all nodes reachable fromu via edges inP are also active after dom(ψ′)
is selected, since all the edges inP are live. Hence all such nodes, includingw, are inB′. SinceD′ andB′ are
disjoint, this impliesw /∈D′, a contradiction.
Having proved Eq. (19), we now proceed to use it to show ∆(v|ψ′)≤ ∆(v|ψ) as in§6.
∆(v|ψ′) = ∑
(φ,φ′)µ(φ,φ′) (f(dom(ψ′)∪{v},φ′)−f(dom(ψ′),φ′))
≤ ∑
(φ,φ′)µ(φ,φ′) (f(dom(ψ)∪{v},φ )−f(dom(ψ),φ )) = ∆( v|ψ)
which completes the proof.
8.2.1 C OMPARISON WITH STOCHASTIC SUBMODULAR MAXIMIZATION
It is worth contrasting the Adaptive Viral Marketing problem with the Stochastic Submodular Maximization
problem of§6. In the latter problem, we can think of the items as being random independently distributed sets.
In Adaptive Viral Marketing by contrast, the random sets (of nodes inﬂuenced when a ﬁxed node is selected)
depend on the random status of the edges, and hence may be correlated through them. Nevertheless, we can
obtain the same
(
1− 1
e
)
approximation factor for both problems.
A Comment on the Myopic Feedback Model. In the conference version of this article (Golovin and Krause,
2010), we considered an alternate feedback model called the myopic feedback model, in which after activating
v we see the status of all edges exiting v in the social network, i.e., ∂+(u) :={(u,v ) :v∈V}∩ A. We
claimed that the objectivef as deﬁned previously is adaptive submodular in the independent cascade model
with myopic feedback, and hence the greedy policy obtains a (1− 1
e) approximation for it. We hereby retract
this claim, and furthermore give a counterexample demonstrating that f is not adaptive submodular under
myopic feedback.
Consider a graph G = (V,E ) with vertices V :={u,v,w}, and edges E :={(u,v ), (v,w )}. The
edge parameters are puv = 1 and pvw = 1−ϵ. Let ˆf(U) = |U| and construct f from ˆf accordingly.
We let ψ ={(u,φu)}, where φu((u,v )) = 1 and φu((v,w )) = ? . Let ψ′ ={(u,φu), (v,φv)} where
φv((v,w )) = 0. Clearly, ψ⊂ψ′. Note ∆(w|ψ) = ϵ, since the marginal beneﬁt of w over dom(ψ) is one
if (v,w ) is dead, and zero if it is live, and the former occurs with probability ϵ. In contrast, ∆(w|ψ′) = 1,
sinceψ′ contains the observation that (v,w ) is dead. Hence ∆(w|ψ)< ∆(w|ψ′), which violates adaptive
submodularity. However, we conjecture that the greedy policy still obtains a constant factor approximation
even in the myopic feedback model.
8.3 The Minimum Cost Cover Objective
We may also wish to adaptively run our campaign until a certain level of market penetration has been achieved,
e.g., a certain number of people have adopted the product. We can formalize this goal using the minimum cost
cover objective. For this objective, we have an instance of Adaptive Stochastic Minimum Cost Cover, in which
we are given a quotaQ≤ ˆf(V ) (quantifying the desired level of market penetration) and we must adaptively
select nodes to activate until the set of all active nodesS satisﬁes ˆf(S)≥Q. We obtain the following result.
Theorem 20 Fix a monotone submodular function ˆf : 2V → R≥0 indicating the reward for inﬂuencing a set,
and a quotaQ≤ ˆf(V ). Suppose the objective isf(S,φ ) := min
{
Q, ˆf(σ(S,φ ))
}
, whereσ(S,φ ) is the set
of all activated nodes whenS is the seed set of activated nodes andφ is the realization. Letη be any value
such that ˆf(S)>Q −η implies ˆf(S)≥Q for allS. Then anyα-approximate greedy policyπ on average
23

costs at mostα
(
ln
(
Q
η
)
+ 1
)2
times the average cost of the best policy obtainingQ reward for the Adaptive
Viral Marketing problem in the independent cascade model with full-adoption feedback as described above.
That is,cavg(π)≤α
(
ln
(
Q
η
)
+ 1
)2
cavg(π∗) for anyπ∗ that covers every realization.
Proof We prove Theorem 20 by recourse to Theorem 13. We have already established that f is adaptive
submodular, in the proof of Theorem 19. It remains to show thatf is strongly adaptive monotone and strongly
adaptive submodular, that these instances are self–certifying, and thatQ andη equal the corresponding terms
in the statement of Theorem 13.
We start with strong adaptive monotonicity. Fixψ,e /∈ dom(ψ), ando∈O. We must show
E [f(dom(ψ), Φ) | Φ∼ψ]≤ E [f(dom(ψ)∪{e}, Φ) | Φ∼ψ, Φ(e) =o]. (20)
LetV +(ψ) denote the active nodes after selecting dom(ψ) and observingψ. By deﬁnition of the full adoption
feedback model, V +(ψ) consists of precisely those nodes v for which there exists a path Puv from some
u∈ dom(ψ) tov via exclusively live edges. The edges whose status we observe consist of all edges exiting
nodes inV +(ψ). It follows that every path from anyu∈V +(ψ) to anyv∈V\V +(ψ) contains at least one
edge which is observed byψ to be dead. Hence, in everyφ∼ψ, the set of nodes activated by selectingdom(ψ)
is the same. Therefore E [f(dom(ψ), Φ) | Φ∼ψ] = ˆf(V +(ψ)). Similarly, if we deﬁneψ′ :=ψ∪{ (e,o )},
then E [f(dom(ψ)∪{e}, Φ) | Φ∼ψ, Φ(e) =o] = ˆf(V +(ψ′)). Note that once activated, nodes never
become inactive. Hence,ψ⊆ψ′ impliesV +(ψ)⊆V +(ψ′). Since ˆf is monotone by assumption, this means
ˆf(V +(ψ))≤ ˆf(V +(ψ′)) which implies Eq. (20) and strong adaptive monotonicity.
Next we establish strong adaptive submodularity. Given that we have already established adaptive
submodularity, it is sufﬁcient to also prove pointwise submodularity. For a ﬁxed realizationφ we have a set of
live edges{(u,v ) :Xuv = 1} which induce a set system in which u covers all nodes reachable fromu via
live edges. LetSu denote this set. It is straightforward to verify that a monotone submodular function ˆf on
nodes induces a monotone submodular function on sets of those nodes. That is,
g(A) := ˆf (∪u∈ASu)
is submodular whenever ˆf is. In particular,g is submodular if for everyA andB we haveg(A) +g(B)≥
g(A∩B) +g(A∪B) however one can easily verify that this set of constraints is a subset of the corresponding
submodularity constaints on ˆf.
Next we establish that these instances are self–certifying. Note that for every φ we have f(V,φ ) =
min
{
Q, ˆf(V )
}
= Q. From our earlier remarks, we know that f(dom(ψ),φ ) = ˆf(V +(ψ)) for every
φ∼ ψ. Hence for all ψ and φ,φ′ consistent with ψ, we have f(dom(ψ),φ ) = f(dom(ψ),φ′) and so
f(dom(ψ),φ ) =Q if and only iff(dom(ψ),φ′) =Q, which proves that the instance is self–certifying.
Finally we show thatQ andη equal the corresponding terms in the statement of Theorem 13. As noted
earlier,f(V,φ ) =Q for allφ. We deﬁnedη as some value such that ˆf(S)>Q−η implies ˆf(S)≥Q for all
S. Since range(f) =
{
min
{
Q, ˆf(S)
}
:S⊆V
}
, it follows that we cannot havef(S,φ )∈ (Q−η,Q ) for
anyS andφ, so thatη satisﬁes the requirements of the corresponding term in Theorem 13. Hence we may
apply Theorem 13 on this self–certifying instance withQ andη to obtain the claimed result.
9. Application: Automated Diagnosis and Active Learning
An important problem in AI is automated diagnosis. For example, suppose we have different hypotheses about
the state of a patient, and can run medical tests to rule out inconsistent hypotheses. The goal is to adaptively
choose tests to infer the state of the patient as quickly as possible.
A similar problem arises in active learning. Obtaining labeled data to train a classiﬁer is typically expensive,
as it often involves asking an expert. In active learning (c.f. Cohn et al. (1996); McCallum and Nigam (1998)),
24

Figure 4: Illustration of the Active Learning problem, in the simple special case of one-dimensional data and
binary threshold hypothesesH ={hτ :τ∈ R}, wherehτ(x) = 1 ifx≥τ and 0 otherwise.
the key idea is that some labels are more informative than others: labeling a few unlabeled examples can imply
the labels of many other unlabeled examples, and thus the cost of obtaining the labels from an expert can be
avoided. As is standard, we assume that we are given a set of hypothesesH, and a set of unlabeled data points
X where eachx∈X is independently drawn from some distributionD. LetL be the set of possible labels.
Classical learning theory yields probably approximately correct (PAC) bounds, bounding the numbern of
examples drawn i.i.d. fromD needed to output a hypothesish that will have expected error at mostε with
probability at least 1−δ, for some ﬁxed ε,δ > 0. That is, if h∗ is the target hypothesis (with zero error),
and error(h) := Px∼D [h(x)⁄=h∗(x)] is the error of h, we require P [error(h)≤ε]≥ 1−δ. The latter
probability is taken with respect toD(X); the learned hypothesish and thus error(h) depend on it. A key
challenge in active learning is to avoid bias: actively selected examples are no longer i.i.d., and thus sample
complexity bounds for passive learning no longer apply. If one is not careful, active learning may require more
samples than passive learning to achieve the same generalization error. One natural approach to active learning
that is guaranteed to perform at least as well as passive learning is pool-based active learning (McCallum and
Nigam, 1998): The idea is to drawn unlabeled examples i.i.d. However, instead of obtaining all labels, labels
are adaptively requested until the labels of all unlabeled examples are implied by the obtained labels. Now we
have obtainedn labeled examples drawn i.i.d., and classical PAC bounds still apply. The key question is how
to request the labels for the pool to infer the remaining labels as quickly as possible.
In the case of binary labels (or test outcomes) L ={−1, 1}, various authors have considered greedy
policies which generalize binary search (Garey and Graham, 1974; Loveland, 1985; Arkin et al., 1993;
Kosaraju et al., 1999; Dasgupta, 2004; Guillory and Bilmes, 2009; Nowak, 2009). The simplest of these,
called generalized binary search (GBS) or the splitting algorithm, works as follows. Deﬁne the version
spaceV to be the set of hypotheses consistent with the observed labels (here we assume that there is no
label noise). In the worst-case setting, GBS selects a query x∈ X that minimizes
⏐⏐∑
h∈V h(x)
⏐⏐. In the
Bayesian setting we assume we are given a prior pH over hypotheses; in this case GBS selects a query
x ∈ X that minimizes
⏐⏐∑
h∈V pH(h)·h(x)
⏐⏐. Intuitively these policies myopically attempt to shrink a
measure of the version space (i.e., the cardinality or the probability mass) as quickly as possible. The former
provides anO(log|H|)-approximation for the worst-case number of queries (Arkin et al., 1993), and the
latter provides an O(log 1
minhpH(h))-approximation for the expected number of queries (Kosaraju et al.,
1999; Dasgupta, 2004) and a natural generalization of GBS obtains the same guarantees with a larger set
of labels (Guillory and Bilmes, 2009). Kosaraju et al. also prove that running GBS on a modiﬁed prior
p′
H(h)∝ max
{
pH(h), 1/|H|2 log|H|
}
is sufﬁcient to obtain anO(log|H|)-approximation.
Viewed from this perspective of the previous sections, shrinking the version space amounts to “covering”
all false hypotheses with stochastic sets (i.e., queries), where queryx covers all hypotheses that disagree with
the target hypothesish∗ atx. That is,x covers{h :h(x)⁄=h∗(x)}. As in§8, these sets may be correlated in
complex ways determined by the set of possible hypotheses. As we will show, the reduction in version space
mass is adaptive submodular, and this allows us to obtain a new analysis of GBS using adaptive submodularity,
25

which has a weaker approximation guarantee than is optimal, but is arguably more amenable to extensions and
generalizations than previous analyses.
Theorem 21 In the Bayesian setting in which there is a prior pH on a ﬁnite set of hypotheses H, the
generalized binary search algorithm makes OPT·
(
ln
(
1
minhpH(h)
)
+ 1
)2
queries in expectation to identify
a hypothesis drawn frompH, where OPT is the minimum expected number of queries made by any policy. If
minhpH(h) is sufﬁciently small, running the algorithm on a modiﬁed priorp′
H(h)∝ max
{
pH(h), 1/|H|2}
improves the approximation factor toO
(
(ln|H|)2
)
.
We devote the better part of the remainder of this section to the proof of Theorem 21, which has several
components. We ﬁrst address the important special case of a uniform prior over hypotheses, i.e., pH(h) =
1/|H| for allh∈H, and then we reduce the case with a general prior to a uniform prior. We wish to appeal to
Theorem 13, so we convert the problem into an Adaptive Stochastic Min Cost Cover problem.
9.1 The Reduction to Adaptive Stochastic Min Cost Cover
Deﬁne a realizationφh for each hypothesish∈H. The ground set isE =X, and the outcomes are binary;
we deﬁne O ={−1, 1} instead of using{0, 1} to be consistent with our earlier exposition. For all h∈ H
we setφh≡h, meaningφh(x) =h(x) for allx∈X. To deﬁne the objective function, we ﬁrst need some
notation. Given observed labelsψ⊂X×O, letV (ψ) denote the version space, i.e., the set of hypotheses for
whichh(x) = ψ(x) for allx∈ dom(ψ). See Fig. 4 for an illustration of an active learning problem in the
case of indicator hypotheses. For a set of hypothesesV , letpH(V ) :=∑
h∈V pH(h) denote their total prior
probability. Finally, letψ(S,h ) ={(x,h (x)) : x∈S} be the function with domainS that agrees withh on
S. We deﬁne the objective function by
f(S,φh) := 1 −pH(V (ψ(S,h ))) = pH({h′ : ∃x∈S,h′(x)⁄=h(x)})
and usep (φh) = pH(h) = 1/|H| for allh. Let π∗ be an optimal policy for this Adaptive Stochastic Min
Cost Cover instance. Note that there is an exact correspondence between policies for the original problem of
ﬁnding the target hypothesis and our problem of covering the true realization; h∗ is identiﬁed as the target
hypothesis if and only if the version space is reduced to {h∗} which occurs if and only if φh∗ is covered.
Hencecavg(π∗) = OPT. Note that because we have assumed a uniform prior over hypotheses, we have
f(X,φh) = 1− 1/|H| for allh. Furthermore, the instances are self–certifying.
Lemma 22 The instances described above are self–certifying for arbitrary priorspH.
Proof Intuitively, theses instances are self–certifying because to coverφh∗ a policy must identifyφh∗. More
formally, these instances are self–certifying because for any φh and ψ such that φh ∼ ψ, we have that
f(dom(ψ),φh) =f(X,φh) impliesV (ψ) ={h}. This in turn means thatφh is the only realization consis-
tent withψ, which trivially implies that any realizationφ′∼ψ also hasf(dom(ψ),φ′) =f(X,φ′); hence the
instance is self–certifying.
9.2 The Uniform Prior
We next prove that the instances generated are adaptive submodular and strongly adaptive monotone under a
uniform prior.
Lemma 23 In the instances described above,f is strongly adaptive monotone and strongly adaptive submod-
ular and with respect to a uniform priorpH.
26

Proof Demonstrating strong adaptive monotonicity under a uniform prior amounts to proving that adding
labels cannot grow the version space, which is clear in our model. That is, each queryx eliminates some subset
of hypotheses, and as more queries are performed, the subset of hypotheses eliminated by x cannot grow.
Moving on to adaptive submodularity, consider the expected marginal contribution of x under two partial
realizationsψ,ψ′ whereψ is a subrealization ofψ′ (i.e.,ψ⊂ψ′), andx /∈ dom(ψ′). Letψ[x/o] be the partial
realization with domain dom(ψ)∪{x} that agrees withψ on its domain, and mapsx too. For eacho∈O, let
ao :=pH(V (ψ[x/o])),bo :=pH(V (ψ′[x/o])). Since a hypothesis eliminated from the version space cannot
later appear in the version space, we haveao≥bo for allo. Next, note the expected reduction in version space
mass (and hence the expected marginal contribution) due to selectingx given partial realizationψ is
∆(x|ψ) =
∑
o∈O
ao· P [Φ(x)⁄=o | Φ∼ψ] =
∑
o
ao
(∑
o′⁄=oao′
∑
o′ao′
)
=
∑
o⁄=o′aoao′
∑
o′ao′
. (21)
The corresponding quantity forψ′ hasbo substituted forao in Eq. (21), for eacho∈O. To prove adaptive
submodularity we must show ∆(x|ψ)≥ ∆(x|ψ′) and to do so it sufﬁces to show that∂φ/∂zo≥ 0 for each
o and⃗ z∈
{
⃗ c∈ [0, 1]O :∑
oco > 0
}
, where φ(⃗ z) :=
(∑
o⁄=o′zozo′
)
/ (∑
o′zo′) has the same functional
form as the expression for ∆(x|ψ) in Eq. (21). This is because∂φ/∂zo≥ 0 for eacho implies that growing
the version space in any manner cannot decrease the expected marginal beneﬁt of queryx, and hence shrinking
it in any manner cannot increase the expected marginal beneﬁt ofx. It is indeed the case that ∂φ/∂zo≥ 0 for
eacho. More speciﬁcally, it holds that
∂φ
∂za
=
∑
b⁄=az2
b +∑
(b,c):b⁄=c,b⁄=a,c⁄=azbzc
(∑
bzb)2 ≥ 0,
which can be derived through elementary calculus.
To further show strong adaptive submodularity, we prove pointwise submodularity of the objective. For
any ﬁxed realization,h, the objectiveS↦→f(S,φ ) amounts to a weighted set cover problem on the incorrect
hypotheses (plus a constant), and is thus submodular.
Hence we can apply Theorem 13 to this self–certifying instance with maximum reward threshold Q =
1−1/|H|, and minimum gapη = 1/|H|, to obtain an upper bound ofOPT (ln (|H|− 1) + 1)2 on the number
of queries made by the generalized binary search algorithm (which corresponds exactly to the greedy policy
for Adaptive Stochastic Min Cost Cover) under the assumption of a uniform prior overH.
9.3 Arbitrary Priors
Now consider general priors overH. We construct the Adaptive Stochastic Min Cost Cover instance as before,
only we change the objective function to
f(S,φh) := 1 −pH(V (ψ(S,h ))) +pH(h). (22)
First note that the instances remain self–certifying. The proof of Lemma 22 goes through completely unchanged
by the modiﬁcation off. We proceed to show adaptive submodularity and strong adaptive monotonicity.
Lemma 24 The objective function f as described in Eq. (22) is strongly adaptive monotone and strongly
adaptive submodular with respect to arbitrary priorspH.
Proof The modiﬁed objective is still adaptive submodular, because (S,φh)↦→ pH(h) is clearly so, and
because adaptive submodularity is deﬁned via linear inequalities it is preserved under taking nonnegative
linear combinations. Note thatf(X,φh) = 1 for allφh. It is still strongly adaptive submodular, because it is
still pointwise submodular.
27

Showingf is strongly adaptive monotone requires slightly more work than before. Fixψ,x /∈ dom(ψ),
ando∈O. We must show
E [f(dom(ψ), Φ) | Φ∼ψ]≤ E [f(dom(ψ)∪{x}, Φ) | Φ∼ψ, Φ(x) =o]. (23)
Plugging in the deﬁnition off, the inequality we wish to prove may be simpliﬁed to
E [pH(Φ) | Φ∼ψ]− E [pH(Φ) | Φ∼ψ[x/o]] ≤ pH(V (ψ))−pH(V (ψ[x/o])). (24)
where Φ is the random realization of the hypothesis, and pH(φh) = pH(h) for allh. Let Velim :=V (ψ)−
V (ψ[x/o]) be the set of hypotheses eliminated from the version space by the observationh(x) =o. Rewriting
Eq. (24), we get
∑
h∈V (ψ)
pH(h)2
pH(V (ψ)) −
∑
h∈V (ψ[x/o])
pH(h)2
pH(V (ψ[x/o])) ≤ pH(Velim). (25)
Let LHS25 denote the left hand side of Eq. (25). We prove Eq. (25) as follows.
LHS25 ≤ ∑
h∈VelimpH(h)2/pH(V (ψ)) [ sincepH(V (ψ[x/o]))≤pH(V (ψ))]
≤ ∑
h∈VelimpH(h)·pH(V (ψ))/pH(V (ψ)) [ sinceh∈V (ψ)⇒pH(h)≤pH(V (ψ))]
= pH(Velim)
We conclude thatf is adaptive submodular and strongly adaptive monotone.
Hence we can apply Theorem 13 to this self–certifying instance with maximum reward thresholdQ = 1,
and minimum gapη = 1/ minhpH(h). As a result we obtain an upper bound ofOPT (ln (1/ minhpH(h)) + 1)2
on the number of queries made by generalized binary search for arbitrary priors, completing the proof of
Theorem 21.
9.4 Improving the Approximation Factor for Highly Nonuniform Priors
To improve this to anO
(
(log|H|)2
)
-approximation in the event that minhpH(h) is extremely small using
the observation of Kosaraju et al. (1999), call a policyπ progressive if it eliminates at least one hypothesis
from its version space in each query. Let p′
H(h) = max
{
pH(h), 1/|H|2}
/Z be the modiﬁed prior, where
Z := ∑
h′ max
{
pH(h′), 1/|H|2}
is the normalizing constant. Let c(π,h ) be the cost (i.e., # of queries)
ofπ under target h. Then cavg(π,p ) := ∑
hc(π,h )p(h) is the expected cost of π under prior p. We will
show thatcavg(π,p′
H) is a good approximation tocavg(π,pH). Callh rare ifpH(h)< 1/|H|2, and common
otherwise. First, note that∑
h′ max
{
pH(h′), 1/|H|2}
≤ 1 + 1/|H|, and sop′
H(h)≥ |H|
|H|+1pH(h), for all
h. Hence for allπ, we havecavg(π,p′
H)≥ |H|
|H|+1cavg(π,pH). Next, we showcavg(π,p′
H)≤cavg(π,pH) + 1.
Consider the quantitycavg(π,p′
H)−cavg(π,pH) =∑
hc(π,h ) (p′
H(h)−pH(h)). The positive contributions
must come from rare hypotheses. However, the total probability mass of these under p′
H is at most 1/|H|,
and since π is progressive c(π,h ) ≤ |H| for all h, hence the difference in costs is at most one. Let
α :=
(
ln
(
1
minhp′
H(h)
)
+ 1
)2
≤
(
ln
(
|H|2 +|H|
)
+ 1
)2
be the approximation factor for generalized binary
search when run on p′
H. Let π be the policy of generalized binary search, and let π∗ be an optimal policy
under priorpH. Then
cavg(π,pH)≤|H| + 1
|H| cavg(π,p′
H)≤|H| + 1
|H| αc avg(π∗,p′
H)≤|H| + 1
|H| α (cavg(π∗,pH) + 1).
Thus for a general prior a simple modiﬁcation of GBS yields anO
(
(log|H|)2
)
-approximation.
28

9.5 Extensions to Arbitrary Costs, Multiple Classes, and Approximate Greedy Policies
This result easily generalizes to handle the setting of multiple classes / test outcomes (i.e., |O|≥ 2), and
α-approximate greedy policies, where we lose a factor ofα in the approximation factor. As we describe in the
Appendix, we can generalize adaptive submodularity to incorporate costs on items, which allows us to extend
this result to handle query costs as well. Recently, Gupta et al. (2010) showed how to simultaneously remove
the dependence on both costs and probabilities from the approximation ratio. Speciﬁcally, within the context
of studying an adaptive travelling salesman problem they investigated the Optimal Decision Tree problem,
which is equivalent to the active learning problem we consider here. Using a clever, more complex algorithm
than adaptive greedy, they achieve anO (log|H|)-approximation in the case of non-uniform costs and general
priors.
9.6 Extensions to Active Learning with Noisy Observations
Theorem 21 and the extensions mentioned so far are in the noise free case, i.e., the result of query x and
observesh∗(x), whereh∗ is the target hypothesis. Many practical problems may have noisy observations.
Nowak (2009) considered the case in which the outcomes are binary, i.e.,O ={−1, 1}, the same query may
be asked multiple times, and for each instance of each query the noise is independent. In this case he gives
performance guarantees for generalized binary search. While this setting may be appropriate if the noise is
due to measurement error, in some applications the noise is persistent, i.e., if queryx is asked several times,
the observation is always the same. Recently, Golovin et al. (2010) and Bellala and Scott (2010) have used
the adaptive submodularity framework to obtain the ﬁrst algorithms with provable (squared–logarithmic)
approximation guarantees for active learning with persistent noise.
10. Experiments
Greedy algorithms are often straightforward to develop and implement, which explains their popular use in
practical applications, such as Bayesian experimental design and Active Learning, as discussed in§9 (also
see the excellent introduction of Nowak (2009)) and Adaptive Stochastic Set Cover, e.g., for ﬁlter design
in streaming databases as discussed in§7. Besides allowing us to prove approximation guarantees for such
algorithms, adaptive submodularity provides the following immediate practical beneﬁts:
1. The ability to use lazy evaluations to speed up its execution.
2. The ability to generate data-dependent bounds on the optimal value.
In this section, we empirically evaluate their beneﬁts within a sensor selection application, in a setting similar
to the one described by Deshpande et al. (2004). In this application, we have deployed a network V of
wireless sensors, e.g., to monitor temperature in a building or trafﬁc in a road network. Since sensors are
battery constrained, we must adaptively select k sensors, and then, given those sensor readings, predict,
e.g., the temperature at all remaining locations. This prediction is possible since temperature measurements
will typically be correlated across space. Here, we will consider the case where sensors can fail to report
measurements due to hardware failures, environmental conditions or interference.
10.1 The Sensor Selection Problem with Unreliable Sensors
More formally, we imagine every location v∈ V is associated with a random variableXv describing the
temperature at that location, and there is a joint probability distributionp (xV ) := P [XV = xV ] that models the
correlation between temperature values. Here,XV = [X1,..., Xn] is the random vector over all temperature
values. We follow Deshpande et al. (2004) and assume that the joint distribution of the sensors is multivariate
Gaussian. A sensorv can make a noisy observationYv =Xv +εv, whereεv is zero mean Gaussian noise with
known varianceσ2. If some measurementsYA = yA are obtained at a subset of locations, then the conditional
distributionp (xV | yA) := P [XV = xV |Y A = yA] allows predictions at the unobserved locations, e.g.,
by predicting E[XV |Y A = yA] (which minimizes the mean squared error). Furthermore, this conditional
distribution quantiﬁes the uncertainty in the prediction: Intuitively, we would like to select sensors that
29

minimize the predictive uncertainty. One way to quantify the predictive uncertainty is to use the remaining
Shannon entropy
H (XV |Y A = yA) := E [− log2 (p (XV | yA))].
We would like to adaptively selectk sensors, to maximize the expected reduction in Shannon entropy (c.f. Se-
bastiani and Wynn (2000); Krause and Guestrin (2009a)). However, in practice, sensors are often unreliable,
and might fail to report their measurements. We assume that after selecting a sensor, we ﬁnd out whether it
has failed or not before deciding which sensor to select next. We suppose that each sensor has an associated
probabilitypfail(v) of failure, in which case no reading is reported, and that sensor failures are independent
of each other and of the ambient temperature atv. Thus we have an instance of the Stochastic Maximization
problem withE :=V ,O :={working, failed}, and
f(A,φ ) := H (XV )− H
(
XV | y{v :φ(v)=working}
)
. (26)
For multivariate normal distributions, the entropy is given as
H (XV |Y A = yA) = 1
2 ln(2πe)n
⏐⏐⏐ΣVA
(
ΣAA +σ2I
)−1
ΣAV
⏐⏐⏐,
where for setsA andB, ΣAB denotes the covariance (matrix) between random vectorsXA andXB. Note that
the predictive covariance does not depend on the actual observationsyA, only on the setA of chosen locations.
Thus,
H (XV |Y A = yA) = H (XV |Y A),
where as usual, H (XV | YA) = E [H (XV | YA = yA)]. As Krause and Guestrin (2005) show, the function
g(A) := I (XV ;YA) = H (XV )− H (XV |Y A) (27)
is monotone submodular, whenever the observationsYV are conditionally independent givenXV .
This insight allows us to apply the result of§6 to show that the objectivef deﬁned in Eq. (26) is adaptive
monotone submodular, using ˆf(S) :=g({v : (v, working)∈S}) for anyS⊆E×O.
10.1.1 D ATA AND EXPERIMENTAL SETUP
Our ﬁrst data set consists of temperature measurements from the network of 46 sensors deployed at Intel
Research Berkeley, which were sampled at 30 second intervals for 5 consecutive days (starting Feb. 28th,
2004). We deﬁne our objective function with respect to the empirical covariance estimated from the data.
We also use data from trafﬁc sensors deployed along the highway I-880 South in California. We use trafﬁc
speed data for all working days from 6 AM to 11 AM for one month, from 357 sensors. The goal is to predict
the speed on all 357 road segments. We again estimate the empirical covariance matrix.
10.1.2 T HE BENEFITS OF LAZY EVALUATION
For both data sets, we run the adaptive greedy algorithm, using both the naive implementation (Algorithm 1)
and the accelerated version using lazy evaluations (Algorithm 2). We vary the probability of sensor failure,
and evaluate the execution time and the number of evaluations of the functiong (deﬁned in Eq. (27)) each
algorithm makes. Figures 5(a) and 5(b) plot execution time given a 50% sensor failure rate, on a computer
with a 2.26 GHz dual core processor and 4 GB RAM. In these applications, function evaluations are the
bottleneck in the computation, so the number of them serves as a machine-independent proxy for the running
time. Figures 5(c) and 5(d) show the performance ratio in terms of this proxy. On the temperature data set,
lazy evaluations speed up the computation by a factor of between roughly 3.5 and 7, depending on the failure
probability. On the larger trafﬁc data set, we obtain speedup factors between 30 and 38. We ﬁnd that the
beneﬁt of the lazy evaluations increases with the problem size and with the failure probability. The dependence
on problem size must ultimately be explained in terms of structural properties of the instances, which also
beneﬁt the nonadaptive accelerated greedy algorithm. The dependence on failure probability has a simpler
30

explanation. Note that in these applications, if the accelerated greedy algorithm selects v, which then fails,
then it does not need to make any additional function evaluations to select the next sensor. Contrast this with
the naive greedy algorithm, which makes a function evaluation for each sensor that has not been selected so
far.
10.1.3 T HE BENEFITS OF THE DATA DEPENDENT BOUND
While adaptive submodularity allows us to prove worst-case performance guarantees for the adaptive greedy
algorithm, in many practical applications it can be expected that these bounds are quite loose. For our sensor
selection application, we use the data dependent bounds of Lemma 6 to compute an upper bound βavg on
maxπfavg(π[k]) as described below, and compare it with the performance guarantee of Theorem 5. For the
accelerated greedy algorithm, we use the upper bounds on the marginal beneﬁts stored in the priority queue
instead of recomputing the marginal beneﬁts, and thus expect somewhat looser bounds. We ﬁnd that for our
application, the bounds are tighter than the worst case bounds. We also ﬁnd that the “lazy” data dependent
bounds are almost as tight as the “eager” bounds using the eagerly recomputed marginal beneﬁts ∆(e|ψ)
for the latest and greatestψ, though the former have slightly higher variance. Figures 5(e) and 5(f) show the
performance of the greedy algorithm as well as the three bounds on the optimal value.
Two subtleties arise when using the data-dependent bounds to bound maxπfavg(π[k]). The ﬁrst is that
Lemma 6 tells us that ∆
(
π∗
[k]|ψ
)
≤ maxA⊆E,|A|≤k
∑
e∈A ∆(e|ψ), whereas we would like to bound the
difference between the optimal reward and the algorithm’s current expected reward, conditioned on seeing
ψ, i.e., E
[
f(E(π∗
[k], Φ), Φ)−f(dom(ψ), Φ) | Φ∼ψ
]
. However, in our applicationsf is strongly adaptive
monotone, and strong adaptive monotonicity implies that for anyπ∗ we have
E
[
f(E(π∗
[k], Φ), Φ)−f(dom(ψ), Φ) | Φ∼ψ
]
≤ ∆
(
π∗
[k]|ψ
)
. (28)
Hence, if we let OPT(ψ) := maxπ E
[
f(E(π[k], Φ), Φ) | Φ∼ψ
]
, Lemma 6 implies that
OPT(ψ)≤ E [f(dom(ψ), Φ) | Φ∼ψ] + max
A⊆E,|A|≤k
∑
e∈A
∆(e|ψ). (29)
The second subtlety is that we obtain a sequence of bounds from Eq. (29). If we consider the (random)
sequence of partial realizations observed by the adaptive greedy algorithm,∅ =ψ0⊂ψ1⊂···⊂ ψk, we
obtaink+1 boundsβ0,...,β k, whereβi := E [f(dom(ψi), Φ) | Φ∼ψi]+maxA⊆E,|A|≤k
∑
e∈A ∆(e|ψi).
Taking the expectation overΦ, note that for anyπ, and anyi,
favg(π[k])≤ E [OPT(ψi)]≤ E [βi].
Therefore for any 0 ≤ i ≤ k , βi is a random variable whose expectation is an upper bound on the
optimal expected reward of any policy. At this point we may be tempted to use the minimum of these, i.e.,
βmin := mini{βi} as our ultimate bound. However, a collection of random variables X0,...,X k with
E [Xi]≥ τ for alli does not, in general, satisfy mini{Xi}≥ τ. While it is possible in our case, with its
independent sensor failures, to use concentration inequalities to bound mini{βi}− mini{E [βi]} with high
probability, and thus add an appropriate term to obtain a true upper bound from βmin, we take a different
approach; we simply use the average boundβavg := 1
k+1
∑k
i=0βi. Of course, depending on the application, a
particular boundβi (chosen independently of the sequenceψ0,ψ 1,...,ψ k) may be superior. For example,
ifg is modular, thenβ0 is best, whereas ifg exhibits strong diminishing returns, then boundsβi with larger
values ofi may be signiﬁcantly tighter.
11. Adaptivity Gap
An important question in adaptive optimization is how much better adaptive policies can perform when
compared to non-adaptive policies. This is quantiﬁed by the adaptivity gap, which is the worst-case ratio, over
31

0 5 10 15 20 25 30 35 40 45 500
0.05
0.1
0.15
0.2
0.25
0.3
0.35
0.4
0.45
Time for Standard and Accelerated Adaptive Greedy
Accelerated Adaptive Greedy
Adaptive Greedy
(a) Temperature Data: Execution time (sec) for the naive
vs accelerated implementations of adaptive greedy vs. the
budgetk on number of sensors selected, whenpfail(v) =
0.5 for allv, plotted with standard errors.
0 50 100 150 200 250 300 3500
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
Time for Standard and Accelerated Adaptive Greedy
Adaptive Greedy
Accelerated Adaptive Greedy
(b) Trafﬁc Data: Execution time (sec) for the naive
vs accelerated implementations of adaptive greedy
vs. the budgetk on number of sensors selected, when
pfail(v) = 0.5 for allv, plotted with standard errors.
0 10 20 30 40 50
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
Redu ction in Function Evaluations vs. Pr[failure]
90%
80%
70%
60%
50%
40%
30%
20%
10%
(c) Temperature Data: The ratio of function evaluations
made by the naive vs accelerated implementations of
adaptive greedy vs. the budgetk on number of sensors
selected, for various failure rates. Averaged over 100
runs.
0 100 200 300 4000
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45
50%
25%
75%
Reduction in Function Evaluations vs . Pr [failur e]
(d) Trafﬁc Data: The ratio of function evaluations made
by the naive vs accelerated implementations of adaptive
greedy vs. the budgetk on number of sensors selected,
for various failure rates. Averaged over 10 runs.
0 5 10 15 20 25 30 35 40 45 500
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
80
90
100
Reward for Adaptive Greedy, with Data−Dependent Bounds
Adaptive Greedy
Standard Bound
Lazy Adaptive Bound
Adaptive Bound
(e) Temperature Data: Rewards & bounds on theoptimal
value whenpfail(v) = 0.5 for allv vs. the budgetk on
number of sensors selected, plotted with standard errors.
0 50 100 150 200 250 300 350 4000
50
100
150
Reward for Adaptive Greedy, with Data−Dependent Bounds
Adaptive Greedy
Standard Bound
Lazy Adaptive Bound
Adaptive Bound
(f) Trafﬁc Data: Rewards & bounds on the optimal value
whenpfail(v) = 0.5 for allv vs. the budgetk on number
of sensors selected, plotted with standard errors.
Figure 5: Experimental results.
32

problem instances, of the performance of the optimal adaptive policy to the optimal non-adaptive solution.
Asadpour et al. (2008) show that in the Stochastic Submodular Maximization problem with independent
failures (as considered in§6), the expected value of the optimal non-adaptive policy is at most a constant
factor 1− 1/e worse than the expected value of the optimal adaptive policy. While we currently do not
have lower bounds for the adaptivity gap of the general Adaptive Stochastic Maximization problem(1), we
can show that even in the case of adaptive submodular functions, the min-cost cover and min-sum cover
versions have large adaptivity gaps, and thus there is a large beneﬁt of using adaptive algorithms. In these
cases, the adaptivity gap is deﬁned as the worst-case ratio of the expected cost of the optimal non-adaptive
policy divided by the expected cost of the optimal adaptive policy. For the Adaptive Stochastic Minimum Cost
Coverage problem (2), Goemans and V ondr´ak (2006) show the special case of Stochastic Set Coverage without
multiplicities has an adaptivity gap of Ω(|E|). Below we exhibit an adaptive stochastic optimization instance
with adaptivity gap of Ω(|E|/ log|E|) for the Adaptive Stochastic Min-Sum Cover problem (3), which also
happens to have the same adaptivity gap for Adaptive Stochastic Minimum Cost Coverage.
Theorem 25 Even for adaptive submodular functions, the adaptivity gap of Adaptive Stochastic Min-Sum
Cover is Ω(n/ logn), wheren =|E|.
Proof SupposeE ={1,...,n }. Consider the active learning problem where our hypothesesh :E→{− 1, 1}
are threshold functions, i.e., h(e) = 1 ife≥ 𝓁 andh(e) =−1 ife < 𝓁for some threshold 𝓁. There is a
uniform distribution over thresholds 𝓁∈{ 1,...,n + 1}. In order to identify the correct hypothesis with
threshold 𝓁, our policy must observe at least one of 𝓁− 1 or 𝓁 (and both of them if 1 < 𝓁≤ n). Let ˆπ
be an optimal non-adaptive policy for this problem. Note that ˆπ can be represented as a permutation of
E, because observing an element multiple times can only increase the cost while providing no beneﬁt over
observing it once, and each element must eventually be selected to guarantee coverage. For the min-sum cover
objective, consider playing ˆπ forn/4 time steps. Then P [𝓁 observed inn/4 steps] =n/4(n + 1). Likewise
P [𝓁− 1 observed inn/4 steps] = n/4(n + 1). Since at least one of these events must occur to identify the
correct hypothesis, by a union bound
P [ˆπ identiﬁes the correct hypothesis inn/4 steps] ≤ n
2(n + 1) ≤ 1/2.
Thus a lower bound on the expected cost of ˆπ isn/8, since forn/4 time steps a cost of at least 1/2 is incurred.
Thus, for both the min-cost and min-sum cover objectives the cost of the optimal non-adaptive policy is Ω(n).
As an example adaptive policy, we can implement a natural binary search strategy, which is guaranteed to
identify the correct hypothesis afterO(logn) steps, thus incurring costO(logn), proving an adaptivity gap of
Ω(n/ logn).
12. Hardness of Approximation
In this paper, we have developed the notion of adaptive submodularity, which characterizes when certain
adaptive stochastic optimization problems are well-behaved in the sense that a simple greedy policy obtains a
constant factor or polylogarithmic factor approximation to the best policy.
In contrast, we can also show that without adaptive submodularity, the adaptive stochastic optimization
problems (1), (2), and (3) are extremely inapproximable, even with (pointwise) modular objective functions
(i.e., those where for each φ,f : 2E×OE→ R is modular/linear in the ﬁrst argument): We cannot hope
to achieve anO(|E|1−ε) approximation ratio for these problems, unless the polynomial hierarchy collapses
down to ΣP
2 .
Theorem 26 For all (possibly non-constant)β≥ 1, no polynomial time algorithm for Adaptive Stochastic
Maximization with a budget ofβk items can approximate the reward of an optimal policy with a budget of
onlyk items to within a multiplicative factor ofO(|E|1−ε/β) for anyε >0, unless PH = ΣP
2 . This holds
even for pointwise modularf.
33

We provide the proof of Theorem 26 in Appendix 15.7. Note that by settingβ = 1, we obtainO(|E|1−ε)
hardness for Adaptive Stochastic Maximization. It turns out that in the instance distribution we construct in
the proof of Theorem 26 the optimal policy covers every realization (i.e., always ﬁnds the treasure) using a
budget ofk =O(|E|ε/2) items. Hence if PH⁄= ΣP
2 then any randomized polynomial time algorithm wishing
to cover this instance must have a budget β = Ω(|E|1−ε) times larger than the optimal policy, in order to
ensure the ratio of rewards, which is Ω(|E|1−ε/β), equals one. This yields the following corollary.
Corollary 27 No polynomial time algorithm for Adaptive Stochastic Min Cost Coverage can approximate the
cost of an optimal policy to within a multiplicative factor ofO(|E|1−ε) for anyε> 0, unless PH = ΣP
2 . This
holds even for pointwise modularf.
Furthermore, since in the instance distribution we construct the optimal policyπ∗ covers every realization
using a budget ofk, it hascΣ(π∗)≤k. Moreover, since we have shown that under our complexity theoretic
assumptions, any polynomial time randomized policyπ with budgetβk achieves at mosto(β/|E|1−ε) of the
(unit) value obtained by the optimal policy with budgetk, it follows thatcΣ(π) = Ω(βk). Since we require
β = Ω(|E|1−ε) to cover any set of realizations constituting, e.g., half of the probability mass, we obtain the
following corollary.
Corollary 28 No polynomial time algorithm for Adaptive Stochastic Min-Sum Cover can approximate the
cost of an optimal policy to within a multiplicative factor ofO(|E|1−ε) for anyε> 0, unless PH = ΣP
2 . This
holds even for pointwise modularf.
13. Related Work
There is a large literature on adaptive optimization under partial observability which relates to adaptive
submodularity, which can be broadly organized into several different categories. Here, we only review relevant
related work that is not already discussed elsewhere in the manuscript.
13.1 Adaptive Versions of Classic Non-adaptive Optimization Problems
Many approaches consider stochastic generalizations of speciﬁc classic non-adaptive optimization problems,
such as Set Cover (Goemans and V ondr´ak, 2006; Liu et al., 2008), Knapsack (Dean et al., 2008, 2005) and
Traveling Salesman (Gupta et al., 2010). In contrast, in this paper our goal is to introduce a general problem
structure – adaptive submodularity – that uniﬁes a number of adaptive optimization problems. This is similar
to how the classic notion of submodularity uniﬁes various optimization problems such as Set Cover, Facility
Location, nonadaptive Bayesian Experimental Design, etc.
13.2 Competitive Online Optimization
Another active area of research in sequential optimization is the study of competitive online algorithms. A
particularly relevant example is Online Set Cover Alon et al. (2009), where there is a known set system, an
arbitrary sequence of elements is presented to the algorithm, and the algorithm must irrevocably select sets to
purchase such that at all times the purchased sets cover all elements which have appeared so far. Alon et al.
(2009) obtain a polylogarithmic approximation to this problem, via an online primal–dual framework which
has been proﬁtably applied to many other problems. Buchbinder and Naor (2009) provide a detailed treatment
of this framework. Note that competitive analysis focuses on worst–case scenarios. In contrast, we assume
probabilistic information about the world and optimize for the average case.
13.3 (Noisy) Interactive Submodular Set Cover
Recent work by Guillory and Bilmes (2010, 2011) considers a class of adaptive optimization problems over
a family of monotone submodular objectives{fh :h∈H}. In their problem, one must cover a monotone
34

submodular objectivefh∗ which depends on the (initially unknown) target hypothesish∗∈H, by adaptively
issuing queries and getting responses. Unlike traditional pool-based active learning, each query may generate
a response from a set of valid responses depending on the target hypothesis. The reward is calculated by
evaluatingfh∗ on the set of (query, response) pairs observed, and the goal is to obtain some thresholdQ of
objective value at minimum total query cost, where queries may have nonuniform costs. In the noisy variant of
the problem (Guillory and Bilmes, 2011), the set of (query, response) pairs observed need not be consistent
with any hypothesis in H, and the goal is to obtain Q of value for all hypotheses that are “close” to being
consistent with the observations. For both variants, Guillory and Bilmes consider the worst-case policy cost,
and provide greedy algorithms optimizing clever hybrid objective functions. They prove an approximation
guarantee of ln(Q|H|) + 1 for integer valued objective functions{fh}h∈H in the noise–free case, and similar
logarithmic approximation guarantees for the noisy case.
While similar in spirit to this work, there are several signiﬁcant differences between the two. Guillory and
Bilmes focus on worst-case policy cost, while we focus mainly on average-case policy cost. The structure
of adaptive submodularity depends on the prior p (φ), whereas there is no such dependence in Interactive
Submodular Set Cover. This dependence in turn allows us to obtain results, such as Theorem 13 for self–
certifying instances, whose approximation guarantee does not depend on the number of realizations in the
way that the guarantees for Interactive Submodular Set Cover depend on|H|. As Guillory and Bilmes prove,
the latter dependence is fundamental under reasonable complexity-theoretic assumptions 6. An interesting
open problem within the adaptive submodularity framework that is highlighted by the work on Interactive
Submodular Set Cover is to identify useful instance-speciﬁc properties that are sufﬁcient to improve upon the
worst-case approximation guarantee of Theorem 14.
13.4 Greedy Frameworks for Adaptive Optimization
The paper that is perhaps closest in spirit to this work is the one on Stochastic Depletion problems by Chan and
Farias (2009), who also identify a general class of adaptive optimization problems than can be near-optimally
solved using greedy algorithms (which in their setting give a factor 2 approximation). However, the similarity
is mainly on a conceptual level: The problems and approaches, as well as example applications considered,
are quite different.
13.5 Stochastic Optimization with Recourse
A class of adaptive optimization problems studied extensively in operations research since Dantzig (1955) is
the area of stochastic optimization with recourse. Here, an optimization problem, such as Set Cover, Steiner
Tree or Facility Location, is presented in multiple stages. At each stage, more information is revealed, but costs
of actions increase. A key difference to the problems studied in this paper is that in these problems, information
gets revealed independently of the actions taken by the algorithm. There are general efﬁcient, sampling based
(approximate) reductions of multi-stage optimization to the deterministic setting; see, e.g.,Gupta et al. (2005).
13.6 Bayesian Global Optimization
Adaptive Stochastic Optimization is also related to the problem of Bayesian Global Optimization (for a recent
survey of the area, c.f. Brochu et al. (2009)). In Bayesian Global Optimization, the goal is to adaptively
select inputs in order to maximize an unknown function that is expensive to evaluate (and can possibly only
be evaluated using noisy observations). A common approach that has been successful in many applications
(for a recent application in machine learning, c.f. Lizotte et al. (2007)), is to assume a prior distribution,
such as a Gaussian process, over the unknown objective function. Several criteria for selecting inputs have
been developed, such as the Expected Improvement (Jones et al., 1998) criterion. However, while recently
performance guarantees where obtained in the no-regret setting (Gr ¨unew¨alder et al., 2010; Srinivas et al.,
2010), we are not aware of any approximation guarantees for Bayesian Global Optimization.
6. They reduce to Set Cover and use the result of Feige (1998), which requires the assumption NP ⊈ DTIME(nO(log log n)), but it
sufﬁces to assume only P⁄= NP using the Set Cover approximation hardness result of Raz and Safra (1997) instead.
35

13.7 Probabilistic Planning
The problem of decision making under partial observability has also been extensively studied in stochastic
optimal control. In particular, Partially Observable Markov Decision Processes (Smallwood and Sondik, 1973),
abbreviated as POMDPs, are a general framework that captures many adaptive optimization problems under
partial observability. Unfortunately, solving POMDPs is PSPACE hard (Papadimitriou and Tsitsiklis, 1987),
thus typically heuristic algorithms with no approximation guarantees are applied (Pineau et al., 2006; Ross
et al., 2008). For some special instances of POMDPs related to Multi-armed Bandit problems, (near-)optimal
policies can be found. These include the (optimal) Gittins-index policy for the classic Multi-armed Bandit
problem (Gittins and Jones, 1979) and approximate policies for the Multi-armed Bandit problem with metric
switching costs (Guha and Munagala, 2009) and special cases of the Restless Bandit problem (Guha et al.,
2009). The problems considered in this paper can be formalized as POMDPs, albeit with exponentially large
state space (where the world state represents the selected items and state/outcome of each item). Thus our
results can be interpreted as widening the class of partially observable planning problems that can be efﬁciently
approximately solved.
13.8 Previous Work by the Authors & Subsequent Developments
This manuscript is an extended version of a paper that appeared in the Conference on Learning Theory
Golovin and Krause (2010). More recently, Golovin and Krause (2011b) proved performance guarantees
for the greedy policy for the problem of maximizing the expected value of a policy under constraints more
complex than simply selecting at mostk items. These include matroid constraints, where a policy can only
select independent sets of items and the greedy policy obtains a 1/2–approximation for adaptive monotone
submodular objectives, and more generallyp-independence system constraints, where the greedy policy obtains
a 1/(p + 1)–approximation. Golovin et al. (2010) and, shortly thereafter, Bellala and Scott (2010), used
the adaptive submodularity framework to obtain the ﬁrst algorithms with provable (squared logarithmic)
approximation guarantees for the difﬁcult and fundamental problem of active learning with persistent noise.
Finally, Golovin et al. (2011) used adaptive submodularity in the context of a dynamic conservation planning,
and obtain competitiveness guarantees for an ecological reserve design problem.
14. Conclusions
Planning under partial observability is a central but notoriously difﬁcult problem in artiﬁcial intelligence. In
this paper, we identiﬁed a novel, general class of adaptive optimization problems under uncertainty that are
amenable to efﬁcient, greedy (approximate) solution. In particular, we introduced the concept of adaptive
submodularity, generalizing submodular set functions to adaptive policies. Our generalization is based on a
natural adaptive analog of the diminishing returns property well understood for set functions. In the special
case of deterministic distributions, adaptive submodularity reduces to the classical notion of submodular set
functions. We proved that several guarantees carried by the non-adaptive greedy algorithm for submodular
set functions generalize to a natural adaptive greedy algorithm in the case of adaptive submodular functions,
for constrained maximization and certain natural coverage problems with both minimum cost and minimum
sum objectives. We also showed how the adaptive greedy algorithm can be accelerated using lazy evaluations,
and how one can compute data-dependent bounds on the optimal solution. We illustrated the usefulness of
the concept by giving several examples of adaptive submodular objectives arising in diverse AI applications
including sensor placement, viral marketing, automated diagnosis and pool-based active learning. Proving
adaptive submodularity for these problems allowed us to recover existing results in these applications as special
cases and lead to natural generalizations. Our experiments on real data indicate that adaptive submodularity
can provide practical beneﬁts, such as signiﬁcant speed ups and tighter data-dependent bounds. We believe
that our results provide an interesting step in the direction of exploiting structure to solve complex stochastic
optimization and planning problems under partial observability.
36

Acknowledgments
This research was partially supported by ONR grant N00014-09-1-1044, NSF grant CNS-0932392, NSF grant
IIS-0953413, DARPA MSEE grant FA8650-11-1-7156, a gift by Microsoft Corporation, an Okawa Foundation
Research Grant, and by the Caltech Center for the Mathematics of Information. We wish to thank Vitaly
Feldman and Jan V ondr´ak for providing an elegant proof of Lemma 47.
References
Noga Alon, Baruch Awerbuch, Yossi Azar, Niv Buchbinder, and Joseph Sefﬁ Naor. The online set cover
problem. SIAM Journal on Computing, 39:361–370, June 2009. ISSN 0097-5397. doi: 10.1137/060661946.
URL http://portal.acm.org/citation.cfm?id=1654887.1654888.
Esther M. Arkin, Henk Meijer, Joseph S. B. Mitchell, David Rappaport, and Steven S. Skiena. Decision trees
for geometric models. In Proceedings of Symposium on Computational Geometry, pages 369–378, New
York, NY , USA, 1993. ACM. ISBN 0-89791-582-8. doi: http://doi.acm.org/10.1145/160985.161167.
Arash Asadpour, Hamid Nazerzadeh, and Amin Saberi. Stochastic submodular maximization. In WINE
’08: Proceedings of the 4th International Workshop on Internet and Network Economics, pages 477–489,
Berlin, Heidelberg, 2008. Springer-Verlag. ISBN 978-3-540-92184-4. doi: http://dx.doi.org/10.1007/
978-3-540-92185-1 53.
G. Bellala and C. Scott. Modiﬁed group generalized binary search with near-optimal performance guarantees.
Technical report, University of Michigan, 2010.
Eric Brochu, Mike Cora, and Nando de Freitas. A tutorial on Bayesian optimization of expensive cost
functions, with application to active user modeling and hierarchical reinforcement learning. Technical
Report TR-2009-23, Department of Computer Science, University of British Columbia, November 2009.
Niv Buchbinder and Joseph (Sefﬁ) Naor. The design of competitive online algorithms via a primal–dual
approach. Foundations and Trends in Theoretical Computer Science, 3:93–263, February 2009. ISSN
1551-305X. doi: 10.1561/0400000024. URL http://portal.acm.org/citation.cfm?id=
1576247.1576248.
Carri W. Chan and Vivek F. Farias. Stochastic depletion problems: Effective myopic policies for a class
of dynamic optimization problems. Mathematics of Operations Research, 34(2):333–350, 2009. ISSN
0364-765X. doi: http://dx.doi.org/10.1287/moor.1080.0364.
David A. Cohn, Zoubin Gharamani, and Michael I. Jordan. Active learning with statistical models. Journal of
Artiﬁcial Intelligence Research (JAIR), 4:129–145, 1996.
George B. Dantzig. Linear programming under uncertainty. Management Science, 1:197–206, 1955.
Sanjoy Dasgupta. Analysis of a greedy active learning strategy. In NIPS: Advances in Neural Information
Processing Systems 17, pages 337–344. MIT Press, 2004.
B. Dean, M.X. Goemans, and J. V ondr´ak. Adaptivity and approximation for stochastic packing problems. In
Proceedings of the 16th ACM-SIAM Symposium on Discrete Algorithms,, pages 395–404, 2005.
B. Dean, M.X. Goemans, and J. V ondr´ak. Approximating the stochastic knapsack problem: The beneﬁt of
adaptivity. Mathematics of Operations Research, 33:945–964, 2008.
A. Deshpande, C. Guestrin, S. Madden, J. Hellerstein, and W. Hong. Model-driven data acquisition in sensor
networks. In Proceedings of the International Conference on Very Large Data Bases (VLDB) , pages
588–599, 2004.
37

Uriel Feige. A threshold of ln n for approximating set cover. Journal of the ACM, 45(4):634 – 652, July 1998.
Uriel Feige and Carsten Lund. On the hardness of computing the permanent of random matrices.Computational
Complexity, 6(2):101–132, 1997. ISSN 1016-3328. doi: http://dx.doi.org/10.1007/BF01262928.
Uriel Feige, L ´aszl´o Lov´asz, and Prasad Tetali. Approximating min sum set cover. Algorithmica, 40(4):
219–234, 2004.
Vitaly Feldman and Jan V ondr´ak. Private communication. 2012.
Satoru Fujishige. Submodular functions and optimization, volume 58. Annals of Discrete Mathematics, North
Holland, Amsterdam, 2nd edition, 2005. ISBN 0-444-52086-4.
M. R. Garey and Ronald L. Graham. Performance bounds on the splitting algorithm for binary testing. Acta
Informatica, 3:347–355, 1974.
J. C. Gittins and D. M. Jones. A dynamic allocation index for the discounted multiarmed bandit problem.
Biometrika, 66(3):561–565, December 1979.
Michel X. Goemans and Jan V ondr´ak. Stochastic covering and adaptivity. In Proceedings of 7th International
Latin American Symposium on Theoretical Informatics, pages 532–543, 2006.
Daniel Golovin and Andreas Krause. Adaptive submodularity: A new approach to active learning and
stochastic optimization. In 23rd Annual Conference on Learning Theory, pages 333–345, 2010.
Daniel Golovin and Andreas Krause. Adaptive submodularity: Theory and applications in active learning and
stochastic optimization. Journal of Artiﬁcial Intelligence Research (JAIR), 42:427–486, 2011a.
Daniel Golovin and Andreas Krause. Adaptive submodular optimization under matroid constraints. CoRR,
abs/1101.4450, 2011b.
Daniel Golovin, Anupam Gupta, Amit Kumar, and Kanat Tangwongsan. All-norms and all- Lp-norms
approximation algorithms. In Ramesh Hariharan, Madhavan Mukund, and V Vinay, editors, IARCS Annual
Conference on Foundations of Software Technology and Theoretical Computer Science (FSTTCS 2008),
Dagstuhl, Germany, 2008. Schloss Dagstuhl - Leibniz-Zentrum fuer Informatik, Germany.
Daniel Golovin, Andreas Krause, and Debajyoti Ray. Near-optimal Bayesian active learning with noisy
observations. In NIPS: Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems 23, pages 766–774. 2010.
Daniel Golovin, Andreas Krause, Beth Gardner, Sarah J. Converse, and Steve Morey. Dynamic resource
allocation in conservation planning. In AAAI ’11: Proceedings of the Twenty–Fifth AAAI Conference on
Artiﬁcial Intelligence, pages 1331–1336. AAAI Press, 2011.
Pranava R. Goundan and Andreas S. Schulz. Revisiting the greedy approach to submodular set function
maximization. Technical report, Massachusetts Institute of Technology, 2007.
Steffen Gr ¨unew¨alder, Jean-Yves Audibert, Manfred Opper, and John Shawe-Taylor. Regret bounds for
Gaussian process bandit problems. In Proceedings of the 13th International Conference on Artiﬁcial
Intelligence and Statistics, 2010.
Sudipto Guha and Kamesh Munagala. Multi-armed bandits with metric switching costs. In Proceedings of the
International Colloquium on Automata, Languages and Programming (ICALP), 2009.
Sudipto Guha, Kamesh Munagala, and Peng Shi. Approximation algorithms for restless bandit problems.
Technical Report 0711.3861v5, arXiv, 2009.
Andrew Guillory and Jeff Bilmes. Average-case active learning with costs. In The 20th International
Conference on Algorithmic Learning Theory, University of Porto, Portugal, October 2009.
38

Andrew Guillory and Jeff Bilmes. Interactive submodular set cover. In Proceedings of the International
Conference on Machine Learning (ICML), number UWEETR-2010-0001, Haifa, Israel, 2010.
Andrew Guillory and Jeff A. Bilmes. Simultaneous learning and covering with adversarial noise. In Interna-
tional Conference on Machine Learning (ICML), Bellevue, Washington, 2011.
Anupam Gupta, Martin P´al, R. Ravi, and Amitabh Sinha. What about Wednesday? Approximation algorithms
for multistage stochastic optimization. In Proceedings of the 8th International Workshop on Approximation
Algorithms for Combinatorial Optimization Problems (APPROX), 2005.
Anupam Gupta, Ravishankar Krishnaswamy, Viswanath Nagarajan, and R. Ravi. Approximation algorithms
for optimal decision trees and adaptive TSP problems. In Proceedings of the International Colloquium on
Automata, Languages and Programming (ICALP), volume 6198 of Lecture Notes in Computer Science,
pages 690–701. Springer, 2010. ISBN 978-3-642-14164-5.
Donald R. Jones, Matthias Schonlau, and William J. Welch. Efﬁcient global optimization of expensive
black-box functions. Journal of Global Optimization, 13:455–492, 1998.
Haim Kaplan, Eyal Kushilevitz, and Yishay Mansour. Learning with attribute costs. In Proceedings of the
37th ACM Symposium on Theory of Computing, pages 356–365, 2005.
David Kempe, Jon Kleinberg, and ´Eva Tardos. Maximizing the spread of inﬂuence through a social network.
In KDD ’03: Proceedings of the ninth ACM SIGKDD international conference on Knowledge discovery
and data mining, pages 137–146, New York, NY , USA, 2003. ACM. ISBN 1-58113-737-0. doi: http:
//doi.acm.org/10.1145/956750.956769.
S. Rao Kosaraju, Teresa M. Przytycka, and Ryan S. Borgstrom. On an optimal split tree problem. In
Proceedings of the 6th International Workshop on Algorithms and Data Structures, pages 157–168, London,
UK, 1999. Springer-Verlag. ISBN 3-540-66279-0.
A. Krause and C. Guestrin. Near-optimal nonmyopic value of information in graphical models. In Proceedings
of Uncertainty in Artiﬁcial Intelligence (UAI), 2005.
Andreas Krause and Carlos Guestrin. Near-optimal observation selection using submodular functions. In
Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI) Nectar track, pages 1650–1654, 2007.
Andreas Krause and Carlos Guestrin. Optimal value of information in graphical models. Journal of Artiﬁcial
Intelligence Research (JAIR), 35:557–591, 2009a.
Andreas Krause and Carlos Guestrin. Intelligent information gathering and submodular function optimization.
Tutorial at the International Joint Conference in Artiﬁcial Intelligence, 2009b.
Jure Leskovec, Andreas Krause, Carlos Guestrin, Christos Faloutsos, Jeanne VanBriesen, and Natalie Glance.
Cost-effective outbreak detection in networks. In KDD ’07: Proceedings of the 13th ACM SIGKDD
international conference on Knowledge discovery and data mining, pages 420–429, New York, NY , USA,
2007. ACM. ISBN 978-1-59593-609-7. doi: http://doi.acm.org/10.1145/1281192.1281239.
M. Littman, J. Goldsmith, and M. Mundhenk. The computational complexity of probabilistic planning.Journal
of Artiﬁcial Intelligence Research, 9:1–36, 1998.
Zhen Liu, Srinivasan Parthasarathy, Anand Ranganathan, and Hao Yang. Near-optimal algorithms for shared
ﬁlter evaluation in data stream systems. In SIGMOD ’08: Proceedings of the 2008 ACM SIGMOD
international conference on Management of data, pages 133–146, New York, NY , USA, 2008. ACM. ISBN
978-1-60558-102-6. doi: http://doi.acm.org/10.1145/1376616.1376633.
39

Daniel Lizotte, Tao Wang, Michael Bowling, and Dale Schuurmans. Automatic gait optimization with
Gaussian process regression. In Proceedings of the Twentieth International Joint Conference on Artiﬁcial
Intelligence (IJCAI), pages 944–949, 2007.
Donald W. Loveland. Performance bounds for binary testing with arbitrary weights. Acta Informatica, 22(1):
101–114, 1985. ISSN 0001-5903. doi: http://dx.doi.org/10.1007/BF00290148.
Andrew McCallum and Kamal Nigam. Employing EM and pool-based active learning for text classiﬁcation.
In Proceedings of the International Conference on Machine Learning (ICML), pages 350–358, 1998.
Michel Minoux. Accelerated greedy algorithms for maximizing submodular set functions. In Proceedings of
the 8th IFIP Conference on Optimization Techniques, pages 234–243. Springer, 1978.
Kamesh Munagala, Shivnath Babu, Rajeev Motwani, Jennifer Widom, and Eiter Thomas. The pipelined set
cover problem. In Proceedings of the Intl. Conf. on Database Theory, pages 83–98, 2005.
F. Nan and V . Saligrama. Comments on the proof of adaptive stochastic set cover based on adaptive submodu-
larity and its implications for the group identiﬁcation problem in “group-based active query selection for
rapid diagnosis in time-critical situations”. IEEE Transactions on Information Theory, 63(11):7612–7614,
Nov 2017. ISSN 0018-9448. doi: 10.1109/TIT.2017.2749505.
George L. Nemhauser, Laurence A. Wolsey, and Marshall L. Fisher. An analysis of approximations for
maximizing submodular set functions - I. Mathematical Programming, 14(1):265–294, 1978.
Rob Nowak. Noisy generalized binary search. In NIPS: Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems
22, pages 1366–1374. 2009.
C. H. Papadimitriou and J. N. Tsitsiklis. The complexity of Markov decision processses. Mathematics of
Operations Research, 12(3):441–450, 1987.
Joelle Pineau, Geoff Gordon, and Sebastian Thrun. Anytime point-based approximations for large POMDPs.
Journal of Artiﬁcial Intelligence Research (JAIR), 27:335–380, 2006.
Ran Raz and Shmuel Safra. A sub-constant error–probability low–degree test, and a sub–constant error-
probability PCP characterization of NP. In STOC ’97: Proceedings of the twenty-ninth annual ACM
Symposium on Theory of Computing, pages 475–484, New York, NY , USA, 1997. ACM. ISBN 0-89791-
888-6. doi: http://doi.acm.org/10.1145/258533.258641.
St´ephane Ross, Joelle Pineau, S ´ebastien Paquet, and Brahim Chaib-draa. Online planning algorithms for
POMDPs. Journal of Artiﬁcial Intelligence Research, 32:663–704, July 2008. ISSN 1076-9757. URL
http://portal.acm.org/citation.cfm?id=1622673.1622690.
Alexander Schrijver. Combinatorial optimization : polyhedra and efﬁciency. Volume B, Part IV, Chapters
39-49. Springer, 2003.
P. Sebastiani and H. P. Wynn. Maximum entropy sampling and optimal Bayesian experimental design.Journal
of the Royal Statistical Society, Series B, 62(1):145–157, 2000.
R.D. Smallwood and E.J. Sondik. The optimal control of partially observable Markov decision processes over
a ﬁnite horizon. Operations Research, 21:1071–1088, 1973.
Niranjan Srinivas, Andreas Krause, Sham Kakade, and Matthias Seeger. Gaussian process optimization in
the bandit setting: No regret and experimental design. In Proceedings of the International Conference on
Machine Learning (ICML), 2010.
Matthew Streeter and Daniel Golovin. An online algorithm for maximizing submodular functions. Technical
Report CMU-CS-07-171, Carnegie Mellon University, 2007.
40

Matthew Streeter and Daniel Golovin. An online algorithm for maximizing submodular functions. In NIPS:
Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems 21, pages 1577–1584, 2008.
Laurence A. Wolsey. An analysis of the greedy algorithm for the submodular set covering problem. Combina-
torica, 2(4):385–393, 1982.
15. Additional Proofs and Incorporating Item Costs
In this appendix we provide all of the proofs omitted from the main text. For the results of§5, we do so by
ﬁrst explaining how our results generalize to the case where items have costs, and then proving generalizations
which incorporate item costs.
15.1 Incorporating Costs: Preliminaries
In this section we provide the preliminaries required to deﬁne and analyze the versions of our problems with
non-uniform item costs. We suppose each iteme∈E has a costc(e), and the cost of a setS⊆E is given
by the modular functionc(S) =∑
e∈Sc(e). We deﬁne the generalizations of problems (1), (2), and (3) in
§15.3,§15.4, and§15.5, respectively.
Our results are with respect to the greedy policyπgreedy andα-approximate greedy policies. With costs,
the greedy policy selects an item maximizing ∆(e|ψ)/c(e), whereψ is the current partial realization.
Deﬁnition 29 (Approximate Greedy Policy with Costs) A policy π is an α-approximate greedy policy if
for allψ such that there existse∈E with ∆(e|ψ)> 0,
π(ψ)∈
{
e : ∆(e|ψ)
c(e) ≥ 1
α max
e′
(∆(e′|ψ)
c(e′)
)}
,
andπ terminates upon observing any ψ such that ∆(e|ψ)≤ 0 for alle∈ E. That is, an α-approximate
greedy policy always obtains at least (1/α) of the maximum possible ratio of conditional expected marginal
beneﬁt to cost, and terminates when no more beneﬁt can be obtained in expectation. A greedy policy is any
1-approximate greedy policy.
It will be convenient to imagine the policy executing over time, such that when a policyπ selects an iteme,
it starts to rune, and ﬁnishes runninge afterc(e) units of time. We next generalize the deﬁnition of policy
truncation. Actually we require three such generalizations, which are all equivalent in the unit cost case.
Deﬁnition 30 (Strict Policy Truncation) The strict level t truncation of a policy π, denoted by π[←t], is
obtained by runningπ fort time units, and unselecting items whose runs have not ﬁnished by timet. Formally,
π[←t] has domain
{
ψ∈ dom(π) : c(π(ψ)) +∑
e∈dom(ψ)c(e)≤t
}
, and agrees with π everywhere in its
domain.
Deﬁnition 31 (Lax Policy Truncation) The lax levelt truncation of a policyπ, denoted byπ[t→], is obtained
by running π for t time units, and selecting the items running at time t. Formally, π[t→] has domain{
ψ∈ dom(π) : ∑
e∈dom(ψ)c(e)<t
}
, and agrees withπ everywhere in its domain.
Deﬁnition 32 (Policy Truncation with Costs) The level-t-truncation of a policy π, denoted by π[t], is a
randomized policy obtained by running π fort time units, and if some item e has been running for 0≤
τ < c(e) time at time t, selectinge independently with probabilityτ/c(e). Formally,π[t] is a randomized
policy that agrees with π everywhere in its domain, has dom(π[←t])⊆ dom(π[t])⊆ dom(π[t→]) with
certainty, and includes each ψ∈ dom(π[t→])\ dom(π[←t]) in its domain independently with probability(
t−∑
e∈dom(ψ)c(e)
)
/c(π(ψ)).
41

In the proofs that follow, we will need a notion of the conditional expected cost of a policy, as well as an
alternate characterization of adaptive monotonicity, based on a notion of policy concatenation. We prove the
equivalence of our two adaptive monotonicity conditions in Lemma 36.
Deﬁnition 33 (Conditional Policy Cost) The conditional policy cost ofπ conditioned onψ, denotedc (π|ψ),
is the expected cost of the itemsπ selects underp (φ|ψ). That is,c (π|ψ) := E [c(E(π, Φ)) | Φ∼ψ].
Deﬁnition 34 (Policy Concatenation) Given two policies π1 andπ2 deﬁneπ1@π2 as the policy obtained
by runningπ1 to completion, and then running policy π2 as if from a fresh start, ignoring the information
gathered7 during the running ofπ1.
Deﬁnition 35 (Adaptive Monotonicity (Alternate Version)) A functionf : 2E×OE→ R≥0 is adaptive
monotone with respect to distributionp (φ) if for all policiesπ andπ′, it holds thatfavg(π)≤favg(π′@π),
wherefavg(π) := E [f(E(π, Φ), Φ)] is deﬁned w.r.t.p (φ).
Lemma 36 (Adaptive Monotonicity Equivalence) Fix a functionf : 2E×OE→ R≥0. Then ∆(e|ψ)≥ 0
for allψ with P [Φ∼ψ]> 0 and alle∈E if and only if for all policiesπ andπ′,favg(π)≤favg(π′@π).
Proof Fix policies π and π′. We begin by proving favg(π′@π) = favg(π@π′). Fix any φ and note that
E(π′@π,φ ) =E(π′,φ )∪E(π,φ ) =E(π@π′,φ ). Hence
favg(π′@π) = E [f(E(π′@π, Φ), Φ)] = E [f(E(π@π′, Φ), Φ)] =favg(π@π′).
Thereforefavg(π)≤favg(π′@π) holds if and only iffavg(π)≤favg(π@π′).
We ﬁrst prove the forward direction. Suppose ∆(e|ψ)≥ 0 for allψ and alle∈E. Note the expression
favg(π@π′)−favg(π) can be written as a conical combination of (nonnegative) ∆(e|ψ) terms, i.e., for
some α≥ 0, favg(π@π′)−favg(π) = ∑
ψ,eα(ψ,e) ∆(e|ψ). Hence favg(π@π′)−favg(π)≥ 0 and so
favg(π)≤favg(π@π′) =favg(π′@π).
We next prove the backward direction, in contrapositive form. Suppose ∆(e|ψ) < 0 for someψ with
P [Φ∼ψ] > 0 ande∈ E. Let e1,...,e r be the items in dom(ψ) and deﬁne policies π andπ′ as follows.
Fori = 1, 2,...,r , both π andπ′ selectei and observe Φ(ei). If either policy observes Φ(ei)⁄= ψ(ei) it
immediately terminates, otherwise it continues. Ifπ succeeds in selecting all ofdom(ψ) then it terminates. Ifπ′
succeeds in selecting all of dom(ψ) then it selectse and then terminates. We claimfavg(π@π′)−favg(π)< 0.
Note thatE(π@π′,φ ) = E(π,φ ) unlessφ∼ψ, and ifφ∼ψ thenE(π@π′,φ ) = E(π,φ )∪{e} and also
E(π,φ ) = dom(ψ). Hence
favg(π@π′)−favg(π) = E [f(E(π@π′, Φ), Φ)−f(E(π, Φ), Φ)]
= E [f(E(π@π′, Φ), Φ)−f(E(π, Φ), Φ)| Φ∼ψ]· P [Φ∼ψ]
= E [f(dom(ψ)∪{e}, Φ)−f(dom(ψ), Φ)| Φ∼ψ]· P [Φ∼ψ]
= ∆( e|ψ)· P [Φ∼ψ]
The last term is negative, as P [Φ∼ψ] > 0 and ∆(e|ψ) < 0 by assumption. Therefore favg(π) >
favg(π@π′) =favg(π′@π), which completes the proof.
7. Technically, if under any realizationφ policyπ2 selects an item thatπ1 previously selected, thenπ1@π2 cannot be written as a
function from a set of partial realizations to E, i.e., it is not a policy. This can be amended by allowing partial realizations to be
multisets over elements ofE×O, so that, e.g., ife is played twice then (e,ψ (e)) appears twice inψ. However, in the interest of
readability we will avoid this more cumbersome multiset formalism, and abuse notation slightly by callingπ1@π2 a policy. This
issue arises whenever we run some policy and then run another from a fresh start.
42

15.2 Adaptive Data Dependent Bounds with Costs
The adaptive data dependent bound has the following generalization with costs.
Lemma 37 (The Adaptive Data Dependent Bound with Costs) Suppose we have made observations ψ
after selecting dom(ψ). Letπ∗ be any policy. Then for adaptive monotone submodularf : 2E×OE→ R≥0
∆(π∗|ψ) ≤ Z ≤ c (π∗|ψ) max
e
(∆(e|ψ)
c(e)
)
(30)
whereZ = maxw
{∑
e∈Ewe ∆(e|ψ) : ∑
ec(e)we≤c (π∗|ψ) and∀e∈E, 0≤we≤ 1
}
.
Proof Order the items in dom(ψ) arbitrarily, and consider the policyπ that for eache∈ dom(ψ) in order
selectse, terminating if Φ(e)⁄= ψ(e) and proceeding otherwise, and, should it succeed in selecting all of
dom(ψ) without terminating (which occurs iff Φ∼ ψ), then proceeds to run π∗ as if from a fresh start,
forgetting the observations in ψ. By construction the expected marginal beneﬁt of running the π∗ portion
ofπ conditioned on Φ∼ ψ equals ∆(π∗|ψ). For all e∈ E, let w(e) = P [e∈E(π, Φ) | Φ∼ψ] be the
probability thate is selected when runningπ, conditioned on Φ∼ψ. Whenever some e∈E\ dom(ψ) is
selected byπ, the current partial realizationψ′ containsψ as a subrealization; hence adaptive submodularity
implies ∆(e|ψ′)≤ ∆(e|ψ). It follows that the total contribution of e to ∆(π∗|ψ) is upper bounded by
w(e)· ∆(e|ψ). Summing overe∈E\ dom(ψ), we get a bound of ∆(π∗|ψ)≤∑
e∈E\dom(ψ)w(e)∆(e|ψ).
Next, note that each e∈ E\ dom(ψ) contributesw(e)c(e) cost to c (π∗|ψ). Hence it must be the case
that∑
e∈E\dom(ψ)w(e)c(e)≤ c (π∗|ψ). Obviously, w(e)∈ [0, 1] for all e, since w(e) is a probability.
Hence ∆(π∗|ψ)≤∑
e∈E\dom(ψ)w(e)∆(e|ψ)≤Z because settingwe =w(e) is feasible for the the linear
program for whichZ is the optimal value.
To showZ≤ c (π∗|ψ) maxe (∆(e|ψ)/c(e)), consider any feasible solution w to the linear program
deﬁningZ. It attains objective value
∑
e∈E
we ∆(e|ψ)≤
∑
e∈E
wec(e)∆(e|ψ)
c(e) ≤
∑
e∈E
wec(e) max
e∈E
(∆(e|ψ)
c(e)
)
≤c (π∗|ψ) max
e∈E
(∆(e|ψ)
c(e)
)
since∑
e∈Ewec(e)≤c (π∗|ψ) by the feasibility ofw.
A simple greedy algorithm can be used to computeZ; we provide pseudocode for it in Algorithm 3. The
correctness of this algorithm is more readily discerned upon rewriting the linear program using variables
xe =c(e)we to obtain
Z = max
x
{∑
e∈E
xe (∆(e|ψ)/c(e)) :
∑
e
xe≤c (π∗|ψ) and∀e∈E, 0≤xe≤c(e)
}
.
Intuitively, it is clear that to optimizex we should shift mass towards variables with the highest ∆(e|ψ)/c(e)
ratio. Clearly, any optimal solution has∑
exe =c (π∗|ψ). Moreover, in any optimal solution,∆(e|ψ)/c(e)>
∆(e′|ψ)/c(e′) impliesxe = c(e) orxe′ = 0, since otherwise it would be possible to shift mass from xe′
toxe and obtain an increase in objective value. If the ∆(e|ψ)/c(e) values are distinct for distinct items,
there will be a unique solution satisfying these constraints, which Algorithm 3 will compute. Otherwise, we
imagine perturbing each ∆(e|ψ) by independent random quantitiesϵe drawn uniformly from [0,ϵ ] to make
them distinct. This changes the optimum value by at most|E|ϵ, which vanishes as we letϵ tend towards zero.
Hence any solution satisfying∑
exe =c (π∗|ψ) and ∆(e|ψ)/c(e)> ∆(e′|ψ)/c(e′) impliesxe =c(e) or
xe′ = 0 is optimal. Since Algorithm 3 outputs the value of such a solution, it is correct.
43

Input: GroundsetE; Partial realizationψ; Costsc :E→ N; BudgetC =c (π∗|ψ); Conditional
expected marginal beneﬁts ∆(e|ψ) for alle∈E.
Output: Z = maxw
{∑
e∈Ewe ∆(e|ψ) : ∑
ec(e)we≤c (π∗|ψ) and∀e∈E, 0≤we≤ 1
}
begin
SortE by ∆(e|ψ)/c(e), so that ∆(e1|ψ)
c(e1) ≥ ∆(e2|ψ)
c(e2) ≥... ≥ ∆(en|ψ)
c(en) ;
Setw← 0;i← 0;a← 0;z← 0;e← NULL ;
whilea<C do
i←i + 1; e←ei;
we← min{1,C−a};
a←a +c(e)we; z←z +we∆(e|ψ);
Outputz;
end
Algorithm 3: Algorithm to compute the data dependent boundZ of Lemma 37.
15.3 The Max-Cover Objective
With item costs, the Adaptive Stochastic Maximization problem becomes one of ﬁnding some
π∗∈ arg max
π
favg(π[k]) (31)
wherek is a budget on the cost of selected items, and we deﬁne favg(π) for a randomized policy π to be
favg(π) := E [f(E(π, Φ), Φ)] as before, where the expectation is now over bothΦ and the internal randomness
ofπ which determinesE(π,φ ) for eachφ. We prove the following generalization of Theorem 5.
Theorem 38 Fix anyα≥ 1 and item costsc :E→ N. Iff is adaptive monotone and adaptive submodular
with respect to the distributionp (φ), andπ is anα-approximate greedy policy, then for all policiesπ∗ and
positive integers𝓁 andk
favg(π[𝓁])>
(
1−e−𝓁/αk
)
favg(π∗
[k]).
Proof The proof goes along the lines of the performance analysis of the greedy algorithm for maximizing
a submodular function subject to a cardinality constraint of Nemhauser et al. (1978). An extension of that
analysis to α-approximate greedy algorithms, which is analogous to ours but for the nonadaptive case, is
shown by Goundan and Schulz (2007). For brevity, we will assume without loss of generality thatπ =π[𝓁]
andπ∗ =π∗
[k]. Then for alli, 0≤i<𝓁
favg(π∗) ≤ favg(π[i]@π∗) ≤ favg(π[i]) +αk
(
favg(π[i+1])−favg(π[i])
)
. (32)
The ﬁrst inequality is due to the adaptive monotonicity of f and Lemma 36, from which we may infer
favg(π2)≤favg(π1@π2) for anyπ1 andπ2. The second inequality may be obtained as a corollary of Lemma 37
as follows. Fix any partial realization ψ of the form
{
(e,φ (e)) :e∈E(π[i],φ )
}
for some φ. Consider
∆(π∗|ψ), which equals the expected marginal beneﬁt of the π∗ portion ofπ[i]@π∗ conditioned on Φ∼ψ.
Lemma 37 allows us to bound it as
E [∆(π∗|ψ)] ≤ E [c (π∗|ψ)]· max
e
(∆(e|ψ)/c(e)),
where the expectations are taken over the internal randomness of π∗, if there is any. Note that since
π∗ has the form π′
[k] for some π′ we know that for all φ, E [c(E(π∗,φ ))] ≤ k, where the expectation
is again taken over the internal randomness of π∗. Hence E [c (π∗|ψ)] ≤ k for all ψ. It follows that
E [∆(π∗|ψ)]≤ k· maxe (∆(e|ψ)/c(e)). By deﬁnition of an α-approximate greedy policy, π obtains
at least (1/α) maxe (∆(e|ψ)/c(e)) ≥ E [∆(π∗|ψ)]/αk expected marginal beneﬁt per unit cost in a
step immediately following its observation of ψ. Next we take an appropriate convex combination of
44

the previous inequality with different values of ψ. Let Ψ be a random partial realization distributed as
pΨ(ψ) := P
[
Ψ =ψ|∃φ.ψ =
{
(e,φ (e)) :e∈E(π[i],φ )
}]
Then
favg(π[i+1])−favg(π[i]) ≥ E
[ 1
α max
e
(∆(e|Ψ)
c(e)
)]
≥ E
[ E [∆(π∗|Ψ)]
αk
]
= favg(π[i]@π∗)−favg(π[i])
αk
A simple rearrangement of terms then yields the second inequality in (32).
Now deﬁne ∆i :=favg(π∗)−favg(π[i]), so that (32) implies ∆i≤αk(∆i− ∆i+1), from which we infer
∆i+1≤
(
1− 1
αk
)
∆i and hence ∆𝓁≤
(
1− 1
αk
)𝓁
∆0 < e−𝓁/αk∆0, where for this last inequality we have
used the fact that 1−x<e −x for allx> 0. Thusfavg(π∗)−favg(π[𝓁])<e−𝓁/αk(
favg(π∗)−favg(π[0])
)
≤
e−𝓁/αkfavg(π∗) sofavg(π)> (1−e−𝓁/αk)favg(π∗).
15.4 The Min-Cost-Cover Objective
In this section, we provide arbitrary item cost generalizations of Theorem 13 and Theorem 14. With item costs
the Adaptive Stochastic Minimum Cost Cover problem becomes one of ﬁnding, for some quota on utilityQ,
π∗∈ arg min
π
cavg(π) such thatf(E(π,φ ),φ )≥Q for allφ, (33)
wherecavg(π) := E [c(E(π, Φ))]. Without loss of generality, we may take a truncated version off, namely
(A,φ )↦→ min{Q,f (A,φ )}, and rephrase Problem (33) as ﬁnding
π∗∈ arg min
π
cavg(π) such thatπ coversφ for allφ. (34)
Hereby, recall that π coversφ if E [f(E(π,φ ),φ )] = f(E,φ ), where the expectation is over any internal
randomness of π. We will consider only Problem (34) for the remainder. We also consider the worst-
case variant of this problem, where we replace the expected costcavg(π) objective with the worst-case cost
cwc(π) := maxφc(E(π,φ )).
The deﬁnition of coverage (Deﬁnition 7 in §5.2 on page 13) requires no modiﬁcation to handle item
costs. Note, however, that coverage is all-or-nothing in the sense that covering a realization φ with prob-
ability less than one does not count as covering it. A corollary of this is that only items whose runs have
ﬁnished help with coverage, whereas currently running items do not. For a simple example, consider the
case where E ={e}, c(e) = 2 , f(A,φ ) = |A|, and policy π that selects e and then terminates. Then
π[1] is a randomized policy which is π with probability 1
2, and is the empty policy with probability 1
2, so
E [f(E(π,φ ),φ )] = 1
2 < 1 =f(E,φ ) for eachφ. Hence, even though half the timeπ[1] covers all realizations,
it is counted as not covering any.
We begin with a claim relating pointwise submodularity to strong adaptive submodularity.
Lemma 39 If f is adaptive submodular with respect to p (φ) and f is pointwise submodular meaning
S↦→f(S,φ ) is submodular for allφ, thenf is strongly adaptive submodular with respect top (φ).
Proof By assumptionf is adaptive submodular with respect top (φ), so it is sufﬁcient to prove that Eq. (16)
holds, i.e., ∆(e|ψ;ψ′)≥ ∆(e|ψ′). Fix any ψ⊆ψ′ ande∈E. Let δφ(e,S ) := f(S∪{e},φ )−f(S,φ ).
45

From the deﬁnition of ∆(e|ψ;ψ′) and ∆(e|ψ′), we have
∆(e|ψ;ψ′) =
∑
φ
P [φ|ψ′]δφ(e, dom(ψ))
≥
∑
φ
P [φ|ψ′]δφ(e, dom(ψ′))
= ∆( e|ψ′)
where we have usedδφ(e, dom(ψ))≥δφ(e, dom(ψ′)) by the pointwise submodularity off.
Now we provide an approximation guarantee for the average-case policy cost with arbitrary item costs.
Theorem 40 Supposef : 2E×OE→ R≥0 is strongly adaptive submodular and strongly adaptive monotone
with respect to p (φ) and there exists Q such that f(E,φ ) = Q for all φ. Let η be any value such that
f(S,φ )>Q−η impliesf(S,φ ) =Q for allS andφ. Letδ = minφp (φ) be the minimum probability of any
realization. Letπ∗
avg be an optimal policy minimizing the expected cost of items selected to guarantee every
realization is covered. Letπ be anα-approximate greedy policy with respect to the item costs. Then in general
cavg(π)≤αc avg(π∗
avg)
(
ln
(Q
δη
)
+ 1
)2
and for self–certifying instances
cavg(π)≤αc avg(π∗
avg)
(
ln
(Q
η
)
+ 1
)2
.
Note that if range(f)⊂ Z, thenη = 1 is a valid choice, so for general and self–certifying instances we have
cavg(π)≤αc avg(π∗
avg) (ln(Q/δ) + 1)2 andcavg(π)≤αc avg(π∗
avg) (ln(Q) + 1)2, respectively.
Proof of Theorem 40
We ﬁrst require some additional deﬁnitions. We extendf by deﬁningf(A,ψ ) via
f(A,ψ ) := E [f(A, Φ)| Φ∼ψ] (35)
Further, let
f(ψ) :=f(dom(ψ),ψ ) = E [f(dom(ψ), Φ) | Φ∼ψ] (36)
Deﬁnition 41 (Execution Trace) Given a policyπ and a realizationφ, let the traceτ =τ(φ) ofπ underφ be
the sequence of partial realizations specifying its set of observations through time, i.e.,ψ0⊂ψ1⊂···⊂ ψ𝓁,
such that dom(ψi)\ dom(ψi−1) consists precisely of theith item selected byπ.
Deﬁnition 42 (Execution Arborescence) For a policyπ, deﬁne its execution arborescence as the digraph
(dom(π),A ) with vertices dom(π) and edges
A :={(ψ,ψ′) :∃φ,ψ′ =ψ∪{ (π(ψ),φ (π(ψ)))}}.
In other words, its vertices are the partial realizations that may be encountered byπ, and it has a directed
edge fromψ toψ′ if it may immediately encounterψ′ afterψ in some execution trace.
Deﬁnition 43 (Spanning Edges, Sources, Targets, and Successors) Given a policy π with execution ar-
borescence with arcsA, and some positivex∈ R, letAx be the edges that spanx expected beneﬁt, i.e.,
Ax :={(ψ,ψ′) : (ψ,ψ′)∈A, f(ψ)<x ≤f(ψ′)}
46

Further letUx be the sources of edges inAx andVx be the targets. That is,Ux :={ψ :∃ψ′, (ψ,ψ′)∈Ax}
andVx :={ψ′ :∃ψ, (ψ,ψ′)∈Ax}. Finally, the successorsSx(ψ) of someψ∈Ux are the sourcesψ′ that
are minimal supersets ofψ inUx when interpreting partial realizations as set of (item, observation) pairs.
Formally,
Sx(ψ) :={ψ′ :ψ′∈Ux, ∄ψ′′,ψ⊂ψ′′⊂ψ′}
Deﬁnition 44 (Concatenative Pseudopolicies) Given two policiesπ andπ∗ and some nonnegativex∈ R,
we deﬁne the concatenative pseudopolicyπ[x]@π∗ as the stochastic process that, on each realizationφ, runs
policyπ until it is just about to achievex expected reward (formally, until reachingψ (φ,x )), and then runs
π∗ as if from scratch. Hence on realizationφ it will play dom(ψ (φ,x ))∪E(π∗,φ ) whereψ (φ,x ) is deﬁned
relative toπ.
Note that π[x]@π∗ isn’t a proper policy, because it decides when to switch to executing π∗ based on
information aboutφ that it cannot infer from its current partial realization. Speciﬁcally, upon reachingψ∈Ux
it will selectπ∗(∅) if there existsψ′ such that (ψ,ψ′)∈Ax andφ∼ψ′, and will selectπ(ψ) otherwise.
THE STRATEGY
Our overall strategy will be to bound the expected costcavg(π) ofπ by bounding the priceθ it pays per unit
of expected reward gained as it runs (measured as E [f(dom(ψ), Φ)| Φ∼ψ] whereψ is the current partial
realization) and then integrating over the run. To bound the priceπ pays, we deﬁne an alternative cost scheme
for policies, bound the priceπ pays in terms of the alternative cost of an optimal policyπ∗
avg, and ﬁnally bound
the alternative cost ofπ∗
avg in terms of its actual cost.
PROGRESS BOUNDS
First, observe that
∆
(
π∗
avg|ψ;ψ′)
≥Q−x for all (ψ,ψ′)∈Ax (37)
This holds becausef(ψ)<x by deﬁnition ofAx, andf(E(π∗
avg,φ ),φ ) =Q for allφ sinceπ∗
avg covers every
realization. Since Q is the maximum possible reward, if ∆
(
π∗
avg|ψ;ψ′)
< Q−x then we can generate a
violation of strong adaptive monotonicity by ﬁxing someφ′∼ψ′, selectingE(π∗
avg,φ′), and then selecting
dom(ψ) to reduce the expected reward.
The bound in Eq. (37) is useful whenx is far fromQ, however we will require a stronger bound forx very
close toQ. We will use slightly different analyses for general instances and for self–certifying instances.
We begin with general instances. For these, we will prove a stronger bound for obtaining the ﬁnal δη
reward, i.e., forx∈ [Q−δη,Q ].
∆
(
π∗
avg|ψ;ψ′)
≥δη for all (ψ,ψ′)∈Ax (38)
Fixψ∈ dom(π) and anyφ′∼ψ. We sayψ coversφ′ ifπ coversφ′ by the time it observesψ. By deﬁnition
ofδ andη, if someφ′∼ψ′ is not covered byψ thenQ−f(dom(ψ),ψ′)≥δη. Hence the last item that π
selects, say upon observingψ, must increase its conditional expected value fromf(dom(ψ),ψ′)≤Q−δη to
Q for allφ∼ψ′.
For self–certifying instances we show that
∆
(
π∗
avg|ψ;ψ′)
≥η for all (ψ,ψ′)∈Ax (39)
using a similar argument forx∈ [Q−η,Q ]. We ﬁrst argue that the last item thatπ selects must increase its
conditional expected value from at mostQ−η toQ. For supposeπ currently observesψ, and has not achieved
conditional valueQ, i.e.,f(ψ)<Q . Then some φ∼ψ is uncovered. Since the instance is self–certifying,
everyφ withφ∼ψ is uncovered, and hasf(dom(ψ),φ )<f (E,φ ) =Q. By deﬁnition of η, for eachφ with
φ∼ψ we then havef(dom(ψ),φ )≤Q−η, which impliesf(dom(ψ),ψ′)≤Q−η.
47

UPPER BOUNDING THE PRICE π PAYS WITH ALTERNATE COSTS
Next we upper-bound the priceπ pays in terms of an alternative pricing scheme, ˆc, forπ∗
avg. Note the cost of
π∗
avg under ˆc may be higher thancavg(π∗
avg). We will eventually bound the alternative cost in terms of the true
cost.
Fixx and anye that may be played byπ∗
avg under some realizationφ. Consider any (ψ,ψ′)∈Ax with
φ∼ ψ′. Fix some ψe∈ dom(π∗
avg) such that e = π∗
avg(ψe). We charge e a price of c(e)/∆(e|ψ∪ψe)
per-unit reward in this case. Hence, under realizationφ, the alternative cost is
c(e)
(f (dom(ψ)∪ dom(ψe)∪{e},φ )−f (dom(ψ)∪ dom(ψe),φ )
∆(e|ψ∪ψe)
)
Taking the expectation overφ such thatφ∼ψ′ andφ∼ψe (which is equivalent toφ∼ψ′∪ψe) yields an
expected alternative cost of
ˆce (ψ,ψ′) :=c(e)
(∆(e|ψ∪ψe;ψ′∪ψe)
∆(e|ψ∪ψe)
)
(40)
For brevity, we will deﬁne
∆a,e := ∆(e|ψ∪ψe;ψ′∪ψe)
for arc a = (ψ,ψ′)∈ Ax andψe. Note we could have multiple ψe such that π∗
avg(ψe) = e, however for
notational convenience we can imagine creating separate copies of e for each such partial realization and
assume without loss of generality that for each item there is a unique partial realization thatπ∗
avg plays it under;
That is, for eache there is at most oneψe such thatπ∗
avg(ψe) =e.
Next, for arca = (ψ,ψ′) deﬁnewa,e to be the probability thatπ∗
avg playse conditioned onψ′:
wa,e := P
[
e∈E(π∗
avg, Φ)| Φ∼ψ′]
= P [ψe|ψ′]
Next, consider the cost ˆc
(
π∗
avg|ψ;ψ′)
which is the expected alternative cost paid by π∗
avg starting from
dom(ψ) and conditioned onψ′ for some ﬁxedx anda = (ψ,ψ′)∈Ax. Note that since the alternative cost
depends onx anda, this alternative cost does as well. Formally,
ˆc
(
π∗
avg|ψ;ψ′)
:=
∑
e
wa,eˆce (ψ,ψ′)
The expected beneﬁt of runningπ∗
avg starting fromψ and conditioning onψ′ is ∆
(
π∗
avg|ψ;ψ′)
:=∑
ewa,e∆a,e.
Hence
ˆc
(
π∗
avg|ψ;ψ′)
=
∑
e
wa,eˆce (ψ,ψ′) (41)
=
∑
e
wa,ec(e)
( ∆a,e
∆(e|ψ∪ψe)
)
(42)
≥
∑
e
wa,e∆a,e min
e′
( c(e′)
∆(e′|ψ∪ψe)
)
(43)
≥
∑
e
wa,e∆a,e min
e′
( c(e′)
∆(e′|ψ)
)
(44)
= ∆
(
π∗
avg|ψ;ψ′)
min
e′
( c(e′)
∆(e′|ψ)
)
(45)
Hence
min
e′
( c(e′)
∆(e′|ψ)
)
≤ ˆc
(
π∗
avg|ψ;ψ′)
∆
(
π∗avg|ψ;ψ′) (46)
48

Next, note thatVx :={ψ′ :∃ψ, (ψ,ψ′)∈Ax} partitions the set of realizations. We deﬁne the alternative
cost ofπ∗
avg as
ˆcavg(π∗
avg) :=
∑
(ψ,ψ′)∈Ax
ˆc
(
π∗
avg|ψ;ψ′)
P [ψ′] (47)
Note it too is implicitly dependent onx.
BOUNDING THE ALTERNATE COSTS
Next we bound ˆcavg(π∗
avg) in terms ofcavg(π∗
avg) and problem parametersQ,η andδ. Ultimately we will show
that for general instances
ˆcavg(π∗
avg)≤cavg(π∗
avg)
(
ln
(Q
δη
)
+ 1
)
(48)
and for self–certifying instances
ˆcavg(π∗
avg)≤cavg(π∗
avg)
(
ln
(Q
η
)
+ 1
)
. (49)
It is sufﬁcient to prove this bound element by element. That is, we deﬁne
ˆc(e) :=
∑
(ψ,ψ′)∈Ax
ˆce (ψ,ψ′) P [ψ′]
and prove ˆc(e)/c(e) ≤
(
ln
(
Q
δη
)
+ 1
)
for general instances, and ˆc(e)/c(e) ≤
(
ln
(
Q
η
)
+ 1
)
for self–
certifying instances.
To simplify the exposition we deﬁne some additional notation. Fixπ,π∗
avg,x, ande. Letq[ψ] := P [ψ|ψe]
and let
q′[ψ] :=
∑
ψ′:(ψ,ψ′)∈Ax
q[ψ′]
Let ∆[ψ] := ∆(e|ψ∪ψe). Let
δ[ψ] :=
∑
ψ′:(ψ,ψ′)∈Ax
(q[ψ′]
q′[ψ]
)
∆(e|ψ∪ψe;ψ′∪ψe)
be the conditional expected beneﬁt of selecting e in the concatenative pseudopolicyπ[x]@π∗ immediately
upon seeingψ (see deﬁnition 44).
By construction,{ψ′ :ψ′∈Vx} partitions the set of all realizations (since for each φ there is a unique
edge in the execution arborescence where the policy passesx expected reward in the traceτ (φ) as the policy
runs). Furthermore, conditioned on ∃(ψ,ψ′)∈ Ax such that Φ∼ ψ′, we pay c(e)δ[ψ]/∆[ψ]. Taking the
expectation overψ∈Ux, we obtain
ˆc(e)
c(e) =
∑
ψ∈Ux
q′[ψ]δ[ψ]
∆[ψ] (50)
Next we need a subclaim about how ∆[ψ] relates to to ∆[ψ′] forψ⊂ψ′. Recall the deﬁnition of Sx(ψ)
(from deﬁnition 43).
Lemma 45 Fixπ,π∗
avg,x, and e and letpi,p′
i, ∆[ψ], and δ[ψ] be as above. For any ψ∈ Ux, if for some
ϵ∈ R
q′[ψ]δ[ψ]≥ (q′[ψ] +ϵ (q[ψ]−q′[ψ])) ∆[ψ]
then
E [∆[ψ′]|ψ′∈Sx(ψ)] :=
∑
ψ′∈Sx(ψ)
P [ψ′∪ψe|ψ∪ψe] ∆[ψ′] ≤ ∆[ψ] (1−ϵ)
49

Proof Fixψ. We claim that by strong adaptive submodularity,
q[ψ]∆[ψ] ≥ q′[ψ]δ[ψ] +
∑
ψv∈Sx(ψ)
q[ψv]∆[ψv] (51)
To see this, note that{ψ′ : (ψ,ψ′)∈Ax}∪{ ψv∈Sx(ψ)} partitions the set of realizations, and thus
q[ψ]∆[ψ] = q′[ψ]δ[ψ] +
∑
ψv∈Sx(ψ)
P [ψv|ψe] ∆(e|ψ∪ψe;ψv∪ψe) (52)
≥ q′[ψ]δ[ψ] +
∑
ψv∈Sx(ψ)
P [ψv|ψe] ∆(e|ψv∪ψe) (53)
≡ q′[ψ]δ[ψ] +
∑
ψv∈Sx(ψ)
q[ψv]∆[ψv] (54)
Given Eq. (51) and the assumption thatq′[ψ]δ[ψ]≥ (q′[ψ] + (q[ψ]−q′[ψ])ϵ) ∆[ψ], we have
q[ψ]∆[ψ] ≥ (q′[ψ] + (q[ψ]−q′[ψ])ϵ) ∆[ψ] +
∑
ψv∈Sx(ψ)
q[ψv]∆[ψv]
Hence ∑
ψv∈Sx(ψ)
q[ψv]∆[ψv]≤ (q[ψ]−q′[ψ])(1−ϵ)∆[ψ]
Dividing by (q[ψ]−q′[ψ]) yields
∑
ψv∈Sx(ψ)
P [ψv|ψ∪ψe] ∆[ψv] =
∑
ψv∈Sx(ψ)
( q[ψv]
q[ψ]−q′[ψ]
)
∆[ψv]≤ (1−ϵ)∆[ψ]
which completes the proof.
Recall we wish to upper-bound ˆc(e)
c(e) using Eq. (50). Letε(ψ)∈ R be set such that
q′[ψ]δ[ψ] = (q′[ψ] +ε(ψ) (q[ψ]−q′[ψ])) ∆[ψ]
for allψ. Then
ˆc(e)
c(e) =
∑
ψ∈Ux
q′[ψ]δ[ψ]
∆[ψ] (55)
=
∑
ψ∈Ux
(q′[ψ] +ε(ψ) (q[ψ]−q′[ψ])) (56)
=
∑
ψ∈Ux
q′[ψ] +
∑
ψ∈Ux
ε(ψ) (q[ψ]−q′[ψ]) (57)
= 1 +
∑
ψ∈Ux
ε(ψ) (q[ψ]−q′[ψ]) (58)
≤ 1 +
∑
ψ∈Ux
ε(ψ)+ (q[ψ]−q′[ψ]) (59)
(60)
whereε(ψ)+ := max (0,ε (ψ)).
50

Lemma 46 For general instances
∑
ψ∈Ux
ε(ψ)+ (q[ψ]−q′[ψ]) ≤ ln
(Q
δη
)
and for self–certifying instances
∑
ψ∈Ux
ε(ψ)+ (q[ψ]−q′[ψ]) ≤ ln
(Q
η
)
Proof From Lemma 45, we have
E [∆[ψ′]|ψ′∈Sx(ψ) andψe] ≤ ∆[ψ] (1−ε(ψ)) (61)
From adaptive submodularity, we also have∆[ψ′]≤ ∆[ψ] for allψ′∈Sx(ψ), and henceE [∆[ψ′]|ψ′∈Sx(ψ) andψe]≤
∆[ψ]. Hence
E [∆[ψ′]|ψ′∈Sx(ψ) andψe] ≤ ∆[ψ]
(
1−ε(ψ)+)
Note ∑
ψ∈Ux
ε(ψ)+ (q[ψ]−q′[ψ])≤
∑
ψ∈Ux
ε(ψ)+q[ψ]
We will bound the latter sum by constructing an unbiased estimate of it, and taking the expectation of that
estimate. Our unbiased estimator is based on a random traceτ(Φ) ofπ
R(Φ) :=
∑
ψ∈Ux,ψ∈τ(Φ)
ε(ψ)+ (62)
where Φ is sampled conditioned on Φ∼ψe, i.e., eachφ is sampled with probability P [φ|ψe].
For anyψ∈Ux, the probability of seeingψ conditioned one being selected (i.e. Φ∼ψe) is exactlyq[ψ].
Hence
E [R(Φ)| Φ∼ψe] :=
∑
ψ∈Ux∩τ(Φ)
q[ψ]ε(ψ)+ (63)
Next consider the random sequence of partial realizations inUx∩τ(Φ), which we will denote asψ1,ψ 2,...,ψ k.
We assume without loss of generality that no policy selects an item that will give it zero reward in expectation.
LetYi(Φ) be a random variable such that
∆[ψi+1] = (1−Yi)∆[ψi]
By adaptive submodularity,Yi≥ 0 for alli, and also E [Yi| Φ∼ψe] =ε(ψi) for alli from Eq. (61). Next,
note that because the maximum possible reward is Q and the minimum increment is η, and the minimum
probability of any realization isδ, we have for allψ ∆[ψ]≤Q, and ∆[ψ]> 0⇒ ∆[ψ]≥δη. Hence
∆[ψk] = ∆[ψ1]
k−1∏
i=1
(1−Yi)
implies
k−1∏
i=1
(1−Yi) = ∆[ψk]/∆[ψ1]≥δη/Q
Using 1−x≤ex, we conclude
δη/Q≤
k−1∏
i=1
(1−Yi)≤ exp
(
−
k−1∑
i=1
Yi
)
51

and hence∑k−1
i=1 Yi≤ ln
(
Q
δη
)
. Hence in general,
E [R(Φ)| Φ∼ψe] = E

 ∑
ψ∈Ux,ψ∈τ(Φ)
ε(ψ)+| Φ∼ψe

 (64)
=
∑
i≥1
E [Yi(Φ)| Φ∼ψe] (65)
= E

∑
i≥1
Yi(Φ)| Φ∼ψe

 (66)
≤ ln
(Q
δη
)
(67)
For self–certifying instances, the argument is similar, except that we have ∆[ψ]> 0⇒ ∆[ψ]≥η because
the the minimum increment is η, and the reward is determined by the current partial realization. Hence
∆[ψk]≥η, and so∑k−1
i=1 Yi≤ ln
(
Q
η
)
in this case, so E [R(Φ)| Φ∼ψe]≤ ln
(
Q
η
)
.
PUTTING IT ALL TOGETHER
We show how to obtain the result for general instances. The result for self–certifying instances is strictly
analogous.
From Eq. (37) and Eq. (38), we have that for all (ψ,ψ′)∈Ax
∆
(
π∗
avg|ψ;ψ′)
≥ max (Q−x,δη ). (68)
From Eq. (46) and the fact that π is an α-approximate greedy policy by assumption we have that for all
(ψ,ψ′)∈Ax
c(π(ψ))
∆(π(ψ)|ψ)≤ αˆc
(
π∗
avg|ψ;ψ′)
∆
(
π∗avg|ψ;ψ′). (69)
Combining this with Eq. (68) yields
c(π(ψ))
∆(π(ψ)|ψ)≤ αˆc
(
π∗
avg|ψ;ψ′)
max (Q−x,δη ) (70)
for all (ψ,ψ′)∈Ax.
The expected priceπ pays per unit of expected reward at the instant it reachesx expected reward is
θ(x) :=
∑
(ψ,ψ′)∈Ax
P [ψ′] c(π(ψ))
∆(π(ψ)|ψ) (71)
≤
∑
(ψ,ψ′)∈Ax
P [ψ′] αˆc
(
π∗
avg|ψ;ψ′)
max (Q−x,δη ) (72)
= αˆcavg(π∗
avg)
max (Q−x,δη ) (73)
since{ψ′ :∃ψ, (ψ,ψ′)∈Ax} partitions the set of realizations.
Next, we can apply Lemma 47 to boundcavg(π) as follows.
52

cavg(π) =
∫ Q
x=0
θ(x)dx (74)
≤
∫ Q
x=0
αˆcavg(π∗
avg)
max (Q−x,δη )dx (75)
= αˆcavg(π∗
avg)
∫ Q
x=0
1
max (Q−x,δη )dx (76)
≤ αcavg(π∗
avg)
(
ln
(Q
δη
)
+ 1
)∫ Q
x=0
1
max (Q−x,δη )dx (77)
≤ αcavg(π∗
avg)
(
ln
(Q
δη
)
+ 1
)2
(78)
This completes the proof for general instances (as mentioned, the result for self–certifying instances is strictly
analogous, merely with different bounds used to relate ˆcavg(π∗
avg) tocavg(π∗
avg)), aside from proving Lemma 47.
The elegant proof that we present here is due to Feldman and V ondr´ak (2012).
Lemma 47 Supposef : 2E×OE→ R≥0 is adaptive submodular and strongly adaptive monotone with
respect to p (φ) and there exists Q such that f(E,φ ) = Q for all φ. Fix any policy π that covers every
realization, and letθ(x) be deﬁned as in the proof of Theorem 40. Then
cavg(π) =
∫ Q
x=0
θ(x)dx.
Proof Recall
θ(x) :=
∑
(ψ,ψ′)∈Ax
P [ψ′] c(π(ψ))
∆(π(ψ)|ψ)
We use an alternative charging scheme to compute the expected cost ofπ: When the policy observesψ and
selectse = π(ψ), we charge it based on the outcome o = φ(e). Speciﬁcally, we charge it proportionally
to its gain in expected reward, as measured byψ↦→ E [f(dom(ψ), Φ)| Φ∼ψ]. Formally, upon observing
ψ′ :=ψ∪{ (e,o )} after selectinge =π(ψ), the algorithm is charged
Ce(ψ,ψ′) :=c(e)
( E [f(dom(ψ′), Φ)| Φ∼ψ′]− E [f(dom(ψ), Φ)| Φ∼ψ]
∆(e|ψ)
)
. (79)
It is straightforward to show that E [Ce(ψ,ψ∪{ (e, Φ(e))}) | Φ∼ψ] = c(e), using the basic fact that
if event A is the union of ﬁnitely many disjoint events B1,...,B m and X is any random variable, then∑
i P [Bi|A] E [X|Bi] = E [X|A]. Hence, in expectation this charging scheme charges the policy exactly
cavg(π). Moreover, the rate at which it charges π upon observing ψ and selecting e = π(ψ) is exactly
c(e)/∆(e|ψ) per unit expected gain. Let θ(ψ) := c(π(ψ))/∆(π(ψ)|ψ). Under this charging scheme the
policy paysθ(ψ)dx to obtain an additionaldx expected reward, given it already hasx, the true realization isφ,
and (ψ,ψ′)∈Ax for someψ′ withφ∼ψ′. Letψ (φ,x ) be the partial realization in the execution trace ofπ
underφ immediately before it obtainsx reward in expectation. Formallyψ (φ,x ) is the maximal element of
dom(π) such thatφ∼ψ andf(ψ)<x , wheref(ψ) is deﬁned as in Eq. (36).
The total alternative cost ofπ underφ is then
∫Q
x=0θ(ψ (φ,x ))dx, and we can compute the expected cost
ofπ as
cavg(π) = E
[∫ Q
x=0
θ(ψ (Φ,x ))dx
]
.
53

where the expectation is taken with respect to Φ. We can then obtain the claimed equality by exchanging the
integral and the expectation operators:
cavg(π) =
∫ Q
x=0
E [θ(ψ (Φ,x ))]dx =
∫ Q
x=0
θ(x)dx.
We can justify this operator exchange in several ways, for example we can apply Tonelli’s theorem since the
pricesθ are always non-negative.
Next we consider the worst-case cost. We generalize Theorem 14 by incorporating arbitrary item costs.
Theorem 48 Supposef : 2E×OE→ R≥0 is adaptive monotone and adaptive submodular with respect to
p (φ), and letη be any value such thatf(S,φ )>f (E,φ )−η impliesf(S,φ ) =f(E,φ ) for allS andφ. Let
δ = minφp (φ) be the minimum probability of any realization. Letπ∗
wc be the optimal policy minimizing the
worst-case costcwc(·) while guaranteeing that every realization is covered. Letπ be anα-approximate greedy
policy with respect to the item costs. Finally, letQ := E [f(E, Φ)] be the maximum possible expected reward.
Then
cwc(π)≤αc wc(π∗
wc)
(
ln
(Q
δη
)
+ 1
)
.
Proof Let π be an α-approximate greedy policy. Let k = cwc(π∗
wc), let 𝓁 = αk ln (Q/δη), and apply
Theorem 38 with these parameters to yield
favg(π[𝓁]) >
(
1−e−𝓁/αk
)
favg(π∗
wc) =
(
1− δη
Q
)
favg(π∗
wc). (80)
Since π∗
wc covers every realization by assumption, favg(π∗
wc) = E [f(E, Φ)] = Q, so rearranging terms
of Eq. (80) yields Q−favg(π[𝓁]) < δη. Since favg(π[𝓁])≤ favg(π[𝓁→]) by the adaptive monotonicity of f,
it follows that Q−favg(π[𝓁→]) < δη. By deﬁnition of δ and η, if some φ is not covered by π[𝓁→] then
Q−favg(π[𝓁→])≥δη. ThusQ−favg(π[𝓁→])<δη impliesQ−favg(π[𝓁→]) = 0, meaningπ[𝓁→] covers every
realization.
We next claim thatπ[𝓁→] has worst-case cost at most𝓁 +αk. It is sufﬁcient to show that the ﬁnal item
executed byπ[𝓁→] has cost at mostαk for any realization. As we will prove, this follows from the facts thatπ
is anα-approximate greedy policy andπ∗
wc covers every realization at cost at mostk. The data dependent
bound, Lemma 37 on page 43, guarantees that
max
e
(∆(e|ψ)
c(e)
)
≥ ∆(π∗
wc|ψ)
c (π∗wc|ψ) ≥ ∆(π∗
wc|ψ)
k . (81)
Supposeψ∈ dom(π). We would like to say that maxe ∆(e|ψ)≤ ∆(π∗
wc|ψ). Supposing this is true, any
iteme with costc(e)>αk must have ∆(e|ψ)/c(e)< ∆(π∗
wc|ψ)/αk, and hence cannot be selected by any
α-approximate greedy policy upon observingψ by Eq. (81), and thus the ﬁnal item executed byπ[𝓁→] has cost
at mostαk for any realization. So we next show that maxe ∆(e|ψ)≤ ∆(π∗
wc|ψ). Towards this end, note
that Lemma 49 implies
max
e
∆(e|ψ)≤ E [f(E, Φ)| Φ∼ψ]− E [f(dom(ψ), Φ)| Φ∼ψ]. (82)
and to prove maxe ∆(e|ψ)≤ ∆(π∗
wc|ψ) it sufﬁces to show
E [f(E, Φ)| Φ∼ψ]≤ E [f(E(π∗
wc, Φ)∪ dom(ψ), Φ)| Φ∼ψ]. (83)
Proving Eq. (83) is quite straightforward iff is strongly adaptive monotone. Given thatf is only adaptive
monotone, it requires some additional effort. So ﬁx A⊂E and letπA be a non-adaptive policy that selects all
54

items inA in some arbitrary order. LetP :={ψ : dom(ψ) =A}. Apply Lemma 49 withπ′ =πA@π∗
wc and
anyψ∈P to obtain
E [f(E(π∗
wc, Φ)∪A, Φ)| Φ∼ψ]≤ E [f(E, Φ)| Φ∼ψ]. (84)
Note that∑
ψ∈P P [Φ∼ψ]·E [f(E(π∗
wc, Φ)∪A, Φ)| Φ∼ψ] =favg(πA@π∗
wc)≥favg(π∗
wc) = E [f(E, Φ)].
Since we know E [f(E, Φ)] =∑
ψ∈P P [Φ∼ψ]· E [f(E, Φ)| Φ∼ψ], an averaging argument together with
Eq. (84) then implies that for allψ∈P
E [f(E(π∗
wc, Φ)∪A, Φ)| Φ∼ψ] = E [f(E, Φ)| Φ∼ψ]. (85)
Sinceψ was an arbitrary partial realization with dom(ψ) =A, andA⊆E was arbitrary, ﬁxψ∈ dom(π)
and letA = dom(ψ). With these settings, Eq. (85) implies Eq. (83), and thus maxe ∆(e|ψ)≤ ∆(π∗
wc|ψ),
and thus anα-approximate greedy policy can never select an item with cost exceedingαk, wherek =cwc(π∗
wc).
Hencecwc(π[𝓁→])−cwc(π[𝓁])≤αk, and socwc(π[𝓁→])≤𝓁 +αk. This completes the proof.
Lemma 49 Fix adaptive monotone submodular objectivef. For any policyπ and anyψ∈ dom(π) we have
E [f(E(π, Φ), Φ) | Φ∼ψ]≤ E [f(E, Φ) | Φ∼ψ].
Proof Augmentπ to a new policyπ′ as follows. Run π to completion, and letψ′ be the partial realization
consisting of all of the states it has observed. If ψ⊆ψ′, then proceed to select all the remaining items inE in
any order. Otherwise, ifψ ⊈ψ′ then terminate. Then
E [f(E(π, Φ), Φ) | Φ∼ψ]≤ E [f(E(π′, Φ), Φ) | Φ∼ψ] = E [f(E, Φ) | Φ∼ψ] (86)
where the inequality is by repeated application of the adaptive monotonicity of f, and the equality is by
construction.
In§5.2 we described how the result of Feige (1998) implies that there is no polynomial time(1−ϵ) ln (Q/η)
approximation algorithm for self–certifying instances of Adaptive Stochastic Min Cost Cover, unlessNP⊆
DTIME(nO(log logn)). Here we show a related result for general instances.
Lemma 50 For every constantϵ> 0, there is no (1−ϵ) ln (Q/δη) polynomial time approximation algorithm
for general instances of Adaptive Stochastic Min Cost Cover, for either the average case objectivecavg(·) or
the worst-case objectivecwc(·), unless NP⊆ DTIME(nO(log logn)).
Proof We offer a reduction from the Set Cover problem. Fix a Set Cover instance with ground set U and
sets{S1,S 2,...,S m}⊆ 2U with unit-cost sets. FixQ,η andδ such that 1/δ andQ/η are positive integers,
and Q
δη =|U|. Let E :={S1,S 2,...,S m}, and set the cost of each item to one. Partition U into 1/δ
disjoint, equally sized subsetsU1,U 2,...,U 1/δ. Construct a realizationφi for eachUi. Let the set of states be
O ={NULL}. Henceφi(e) = NULL for alli ande, so that no knowledge of the true realization is revealed
by selecting items. We use a uniform distribution over realizations, i.e., p (φi) = δ for all i. Finally, our
objective isf(C,φi) :=|∪S∈C (S∩Ui)|, i.e., the number of elements in Ui that we cover with sets inC.
Since|O| = 1, every realization is consistent with every possible partial realizationψ. Hence for anyψ, we
have E [f(dom(ψ), Φ)| Φ∼ψ] = δ ˆf(dom(ψ)), where ˆf(C) =|∪S∈C S| is the objective function of the
original set cover instance. Since ˆf is submodular,f is adaptive submodular. Likewise, since ˆf is monotone,
and|O| = 1,f is strongly adaptive monotone. Now, to cover any realization, we must obtain the maximum
possible value for all realizations, which means selecting a collection of setsC such that∪S∈CS =U. Con-
versely, anyC such that∪S∈CS =U clearly coversf. Hence this instance of Adaptive Stochastic Min Cost
Cover, with either the average case objectivecavg(·) or the worst-case objectivecwc(·), is equivalent to the
original Set Cover instance. Therefore, the result from Feige (1998) implies that there is no polynomial time
algorithm for obtaining a (1−ϵ) ln|U| = (1−ϵ) ln (Q/δη) approximation for Adaptive Stochastic Min Cost
Cover unless NP⊆ DTIME(nO(log logn)).
55

15.5 The Min-Sum Objective
In this section we prove Theorem 15, which appears on page 16, in the case where the items have arbitrary
costs. Our proof resembles the analogous proof of Streeter and Golovin (2007) for the non-adaptive min-sum
submodular cover problem, and, like that proof, ultimately derives from an extremely elegant performance
analysis of the greedy algorithm for min-sum set cover due to Feige et al. (2004).
The objective functioncΣ(·) generalized to arbitrary cost items uses the strict truncation8π[←t] in place ofπ[t]
in the unit-cost deﬁnition:
cΣ(π) :=
∞∑
t=0
(
E [f(E, Φ)]−favg(π[←t])
)
=
∑
φ
p (φ)
∞∑
t=0
(
f(E,φ )−f(E(π[←t],φ ),φ )
)
. (87)
We will prove that anyα-approximate greedy policyπ achieves a 4α-approximation for the min-sum objective,
i.e.,cΣ(π)≤ 4αc Σ(π∗) for all policiesπ∗. To do so, we require the following lemma.
Lemma 51 Fix an α-approximate greedy policy π for some adaptive monotone submodular function f
and let si := α
(
favg(π[i+1])−favg(π[i])
)
. For any policy π∗ and nonnegative integers i andk, we have
favg(π∗
[k])≤favg(π[←i]) +k·si.
Proof Fixπ,π∗,i , andk. By adaptive monotonicityfavg(π∗
[k])≤favg(π[←i]@π∗
[k]). We next aim to prove
favg(π[←i]@π∗
[k])≤favg(π[←i]) +k·si (88)
which is sufﬁcient to complete the proof. Towards this end, ﬁx a partial realizationψ of the form
{
(e,φ (e)) :e∈E(π[←i],φ )
}
for someφ. Consider ∆
(
π∗
[k]|ψ
)
, which equals the expected marginal beneﬁt of theπ∗
[k] portion ofπ[←i]@π∗
[k]
conditioned on Φ∼ψ. Lemma 37 allows us to bound it as
E
[
∆
(
π∗
[k]|ψ
)]
≤ E
[
c
(
π∗
[k]|ψ
)]
· max
e
(∆(e|ψ)
c(e)
)
,
where the expectations are taken over the internal randomness ofπ∗, if there is any. Note that for allφ, we
have E
[
c(E(π∗
[k],φ ))
]
≤k, where the expectation is again taken over the internal randomness ofπ∗
[k]. Hence
E
[
c
(
π∗
[k]|ψ
)]
≤k for allψ. It follows that E
[
∆
(
π∗
[k]|ψ
)]
≤k· maxe (∆(e|ψ)/c(e)). By deﬁnition of
anα-approximate greedy policy,π obtains at least
(1/α) max
e
(∆(e|ψ)/c(e))≥ E
[
∆
(
π∗
[k]|ψ
)]
/αk (89)
expected marginal beneﬁt per unit cost in a step immediately following its observation of ψ. Next we take
an appropriate convex combination of the previous inequality with different values ofψ. Let Ψ be a random
partial realization distributed as
{
(e, Φ(e)) :e∈E(π[←i], Φ)
}
. Then taking the expectation of Eq. (89) over
Ψ yields
favg(π[i+1])−favg(π[i])≥ Eψ


E
[
∆
(
π∗
[k]|Ψ
)]
αk

 =
favg(π[←i]@π∗
[k])−favg(π[←i])
αk . (90)
Multiplying Eq. (90) by αk, and substituting in si = α
(
favg(π[i+1])−favg(π[i])
)
, we conclude ksi ≥
favg(π[←i]@π∗
[k])−favg(π[←i]) which immediately yields Eq. (88) and concludes the proof.
56

Figure 6: An illustration of the inequality
∫∞
x=0h(x)dx≥∑
i≥0xi (yi−yi+1).
Using Lemma 51, together with a geometric argument developed by Feige et al. (2004), we now prove
Theorem 15.
Proof of Theorem 15: LetQ := E [f(E, Φ)] be the maximum possible expected reward, where the expec-
tation is taken w.r.t. p (φ). Let π be an α-approximate greedy policy. Deﬁne Ri := Q−favg
(
π[i]
)
and
deﬁne Pi := Q−favg
(
π[←i]
)
. Let xi := Pi
2si
, let yi := Ri
2 , and let h(x) := Q−favg(π∗
[x]). We claim
favg
(
π[←i]
)
≤favg
(
π[i]
)
and soPi≥Ri. This clearly holds ifπ[←i] is the empty policy, and otherwiseπ can
always select an item that contributes zero marginal beneﬁt, namely an item it has already played previously.
Hence anα-approximate greedy policyπ can never select items with negative expected marginal beneﬁt, and
sofavg
(
π[←i]
)
≤favg
(
π[i]
)
. By Lemma 51,favg
(
π∗
[xi]
)
≤favg
(
π[←i]
)
+xisi. Therefore
h(xi)≥Q−favg(π[←i])−xi·si =Pi− Pi
2 ≥ Ri
2 =yi (91)
For similar reasons thatfavg
(
π[←i]
)
≤favg
(
π[i]
)
, we havefavg
(
π[i−1]
)
≤favg
(
π[i]
)
, and so the sequence
⟨y1,y 2,... ⟩ is non-increasing. The adaptive monotonicity and adaptive submodularity off imply thath(x)
is non-increasing. Informally, this is because otherwise, if favg(π∗
[x]) > favg(π∗
[x+1]) for some x, then the
optimal policy must be sacriﬁcing immediate rewards at time x in exchange for greater returns later, and
it can be shown that if such a strategy is optimal, then adaptive submodularity cannot hold. Eq. (91) and
the monotonicity ofh andi↦→ yi imply that
∫∞
x=0h(x)dx≥∑
i≥0xi (yi−yi+1) (see Figure 6). The left
hand side is a lower bound for cΣ(π∗), and because si = α (Ri−Ri+1) the right hand side simpliﬁes to
1
4α
∑
i≥0Pi = 1
4αcΣ(π), provingcΣ(π)≤ 4α·cΣ(π∗). ■
15.7 Proof of Approximation Hardness in the Absence of Adaptive Submodularity
We now provide the proof of Theorem 26 whose statement appears on page 33 in§12.
Proof of Theorem 26: We construct a hard instance based on the following intuition. We make the algorithm
go “treasure hunting”. There is a set of t locations{0, 1,,...,t − 1}, there is a treasure at one of these
locations, and the algorithm gets unit reward if it ﬁnds it, and zero reward otherwise. There are m “maps,”
each consisting of a cluster of s bits, and each purporting to indicate where the treasure is, and each map
is stored in a (weak) secret-sharing way, so that querying few bits of a map reveals nothing about where it
says the treasure is. Moreover, all but one of the maps are fake, and there is a puzzle indicating which map
is the correct one indicating the treasure’s location. Formally, a fake map is one which is probabilistically
independent of the location of the treasure, conditioned on the puzzle.
8. See Deﬁnition 30 on page 41.
57

15.6 A Symbol Table
E,e∈E Ground set of items, and an individual item.
O,o∈O States an item may be in, or outcomes of selecting an item, and an individual state/outcome.
φ A realization, i.e., a function from items to states.
ψ A partial realization, typically encoding the current set of observations;
eachψ⊂E×O is a partial mapping from items to states.
Φ, Ψ A random realization and a random partial realization, respectively.
∼ The consistency relation:φ∼ψ meansψ(e) =φ(e) for alle∈ dom(ψ).
p The probability distribution on realizations.
p(φ|ψ) The conditional distribution on realizations:p(φ|ψ) := P [Φ =φ| Φ∼ψ].
π A policy, which maps partial realizations to items.
E(π,φ ) The set of all items selected byπ when run under realizationφ.
∆(e|ψ) The conditional expected marginal beneﬁt ofe conditioned onψ:
∆(e|ψ) := E [f(dom(ψ)∪{e}, Φ)−f(dom(ψ), Φ)| Φ∼ψ].
∆(π|ψ) The conditional expected marginal beneﬁt of policyπ conditioned onψ:
∆(π|ψ) := E [f(dom(ψ)∪E(π, Φ), Φ)−f(dom(ψ), Φ)| Φ∼ψ].
ψ[e/o] Shorthand forψ∪{ (e,o )}.
k Budget on the cost of selected item sets.
π[k] A truncated policy. See Deﬁnition 4 on page 11 (unit costs) and Deﬁnition 32 on page 41.
π[←k] A strictly truncated policy. See Deﬁnition 30 on page 41.
π[k→] A laxly truncated policy. See Deﬁnition 31 on page 41.
π@π′ Policiesπ andπ′ concatenated together. See Deﬁnition 34 on page 42.
f An objective function, of typef : 2E×OE→ R≥0 unless stated otherwise.
favg Average beneﬁt:favg(π) := E [f(E(π, Φ), Φ)].
c Item costsc :E→ N. Extended to sets viac(S) :=∑
e∈Sc(e).
cavg Average cost of a policy:cavg(π) := E [c(E(π, Φ))].
cwc Worst-case cost of a policy:cwc(π) := maxφc(E(π,φ )).
cΣ Min-sum cost of a policy:cΣ(π) :=∑∞
t=0
(
E [f(E, Φ)]−favg(π[←t])
)
.
c (π|ψ) Conditional average policy cost:c (π|ψ) := E [c(E(π, Φ))| Φ∼ψ].
α Approximation factor for greedy optimization in anα-approximate greedy policy.
Q Beneﬁt quota. Often Q = E [f(E, Φ)].
η Coverage gap:η = sup{η′ :f(S,φ )>Q −η′ impliesf(S,φ )≥Q for allS,φ}.
1P The indicator for propositionP , which equals one ifP is true and zero ifP is false.
Table 2: Important symbols and notations used in this article
58

Our instance will have three types of items, E = ET⨄EM⨄EP , where|ET| = t encodes where
the treasure is, |EM| = ms encodes the maps, and |EP| = n3 encodes the puzzle, where m,t,s and n
are speciﬁed below. All outcomes are binary, so that O ={0, 1}, and we identify items with bit indices.
Accordingly we say thatφ(e) is the value of bite. For all e∈EM∪EP , P [Φ(e) = 1] =.5 independently.
The conditional distribution of Φ(ET ) given Φ(EM∪EP ) will be deterministic as speciﬁed below. Our
objective functionf is linear, and deﬁned as follows:
f(A,φ ) =|{e∈A∩ET :φ(e) = 1}|.
We now describe the puzzle, which is to computei(P ) := (perm(P ) mod p) mod 2 𝓁 for a suitable random
matrixP , and suitable primep and integer𝓁, where perm(P ) =∑
σ∈Sn
∏n
i=1Piσ(i) is the permanent ofP .
We exploit Theorem 1.9 of Feige and Lund (1997) in which they show that if there exist constantsη,δ > 0
such that a randomized polynomial time algorithm can compute (perm(P ) mod p) mod 2 𝓁 correctly with
probability 2−𝓁(1 + 1/nη), whereP is drawn uniformly at random from{0, 1, 2,...,p − 1}n×n,p is any
prime superpolynomial inn, and𝓁≤p
( 1
2−δ
)
, then PH = AM = ΣP
2 . To encode the puzzle, we ﬁx a prime
p∈ [2n−2, 2n−1] and use the n3 bits of φ(EP ) to sample P = P (φ) (nearly) uniformly at random from
{0, 1, 2,...,p − 1}n×n as follows. For a matrixP∈ Zn×n, we let rep(P ) :=∑
ijPij·p(i−1)n+(j−1) deﬁne
a basep representation ofP . Note rep(·) is one-to-one forn×n matrices with entries in Zp, so we can deﬁne
its inverse rep−1(·). The encoding P (φ) interprets the bits φ(EP ) as an integer x in [2n3
], and computes
y = x mod (pn2
). If x≤
⌊
2n3
/pn2
⌋
pn2
, thenP = rep−1(y). Otherwise, P is the all zero matrix. This
latter event occurs with probability at mostpn2
/2n3
≤ 2−n2
, and in this case we simply suppose the algorithm
under consideration ﬁnds the treasure and so gets unit reward. This adds 2−n2
to its expected reward. So let us
assume from now on thatP is drawn uniformly at random.
Next we consider the maps. PartitionEM =⨄m
i=1Mi intom mapsMi, each consisting ofs items. For
each mapMi, partition its items intos/ log2t groups of log2t bits each, so that the bits of each group encode a
log2t bit binary string. Letvi∈{ 0, 1,...,t − 1} be the XOR of theses/ log2t binary strings, interpreted as
an integer (using any ﬁxed encoding). We sayMi points tovi as the location of the treasure. A priori, each vi
is uniformly distributed in{0,...,t − 1}. For a particular realization ofφ(EP∪EM), deﬁnev(φ) :=vi(P(φ)).
We setv(φ) to be the location of the treasure under realizationφ, i.e., we labelET ={e0,e 1,...,e t−1} and
ensureφ(ej) = 1 ifj =vi(P(φ)), andφ(e) = 0 for all othere∈ET . Note the random variablev =v(φ) is
distributed uniformly at random in{0, 1,...,t −1}. Note that this still holds if we condition on the realizations
of any set ofs/ log2t− 1 items in a map, because in this case there is still at least one group whose bits remain
completely unobserved.
Now consider the optimal policy with a budget ofk =n3 +s + 1 items to pick. Clearly, its reward can be
at most 1. However, given a budget ofk, a computationally unconstrained policy can exhaustively sampleEP ,
solve the puzzle (i.e., computei(P )), read the correct map (i.e., exhaustively sampleMi(P)), decode the map
(i.e., computev =vi(P)), and get the treasure (i.e., pickev) thereby obtaining a reward of one.
Now we give an upper bound on the expected rewardR of any randomized polynomial time algorithm
A with a budget of βk items, assuming ΣP
2 ⁄= PH. Fix a small constant γ > 0, and set s = n3 and
m = t = n1/γ. We suppose we giveA the realizationsφ(EM) for free. We also replace its budget of βk
items with a budget ofβk speciﬁcally for map items inEM and an additional budget ofβk speciﬁcally for
the treasure locations inET . Obviously, this can only help it. As noted, if it selects less than s/ log2t bits
from the map Mi(P) indicated by P , the distribution over vi(P) conditioned on those realizations is still
uniform. Of course, knowledge of vi fori⁄= i(P ) is useless for getting reward. Hence A can try at most
βk log2(t)/s =o(βk) maps in an attempt to ﬁndMi(P). Note that if we have a randomized algorithm which
given a randomP drawn from{0, 1, 2,...,p − 1}n×n always outputs a setS of integers of sizeα such that
P [i(P )∈S]≥q, then we can use it to construct a randomized algorithm that, givenP , outputs an integerx
such that P [i(P ) =x]≥q/α, simply by running the ﬁrst algorithm and then selecting a random item of S. If
A does not ﬁndMi(P), the distribution on the treasure’s location is uniform given its knowledge. Hence it’s
budget ofβk treasure locations can only earn it expected reward at mostβk/t. Armed with these observations
and Theorem 1.9 in the work of Feige and Lund (1997) and our complexity theoretic assumptions, we infer
59

E [R]≤o(βk)· 2−𝓁(1 + 1/nη) +βk/t + 2−n2
. Sinces =n3 andm =t =n1/γ andγ = Θ(1) andη = 1
and𝓁 = log2m andk =n3 +s + 1 = 2n3 + 1, we have
E [R]≤ βk
t (1 +o(1)) = 2βn3−1/γ(1 +o(1)).
Next note that|E| =t +ms +n3 =n3+1/γ(1 +o(1)). Straightforward algebra shows that in order to ensure
E [R] =o(β/|E|1−ε), it sufﬁces to chooseγ≤ε/6. Thus, under our complexity theoretic assumptions, any
polynomial time randomized algorithmA with budgetβk achieves at mosto(β/|E|1−ε) of the value obtained
by the optimal policy with budgetk, so the approximation ratio isω(|E|1−ε/β). ■
60