Journal of Artiﬁcial Intelligence Research 42 (2011) 427-486 Submitted 1/11; published 11/11
Adaptive Submodularity: Theory and Applications in Active Learning
and Stochastic Optimization
Daniel Golovin DGOLOVIN @CALTECH .EDU
California Institute of Technology
Pasadena, CA 91125, USA
Andreas Krause KRAUSEA @ETHZ .CH
Swiss Federal Institute of Technology
8092 Zurich, Switzerland
Abstract
Many problems in artiﬁcial intelligence require adaptively making a sequence of decisions with
uncertain outcomes under partial observability. Solving such stochastic optimization problems
is a fundamental but notoriously difﬁcult challenge. In this paper, we introduce the concept of
adaptive submodularity , generalizing submodular set functions to adaptive policies. We prove
that if a problem satisﬁes this property, a simple adaptive greedy algorithm is guaranteed to be
competitive with the optimal policy. In addition to providing performance guarantees for both
stochastic maximization and coverage, adaptive submodularity can be exploited to drastically speed
up the greedy algorithm by using lazy evaluations. We illustrate the usefulness of the concept
by giving several examples of adaptive submodular objectives arising in diverse AI applications
including management of sensing resources, viral marketing and active learning. Proving adaptive
submodularity for these problems allows us to recover existing results in these applications as
special cases, improve approximation guarantees and handle natural generalizations.
1. Introduction
In many problems arising in artiﬁcial intelligence one needs to adaptively make a sequence of deci-
sions, taking into account observations about the outcomes of past decisions. Often these outcomes
are uncertain, and one may only know a probability distribution over them. Finding optimal policies
for decision making in such partially observable stochastic optimization problems is notoriously in-
tractable (see, e.g. Littman, Goldsmith, & Mundhenk, 1998). A fundamental challenge is to identify
classes of planning problems for which simple solutions obtain (near-) optimal performance.
In this paper, we introduce the concept of adaptive submodularity, and prove that if a partially
observable stochastic optimization problem satisﬁes this property, a simple adaptive greedy algo-
rithm is guaranteed to obtain near-optimal solutions. In fact, under reasonable complexity-theoretic
assumptions, no polynomial time algorithm is able to obtain better solutions in general. Adaptive
submodularity generalizes the classical notion of submodularity1, which has been successfully used
to develop approximation algorithms for a variety of non-adaptive optimization problems. Submod-
ularity, informally, is an intuitive notion of diminishing returns, which states that adding an element
to a small set helps more than adding that same element to a larger (super-) set. A celebrated result of
the work of Nemhauser, Wolsey, and Fisher (1978) guarantees that for such submodular functions,
a simple greedy algorithm, which adds the element that maximally increases the objective value,
1. For an extensive treatment of submodularity, see the books of Fujishige (2005) and Schrijver (2003).
c©2011 AI Access Foundation. All rights reserved.

GOLOVIN & KRAUSE
selects a near-optimal set of k elements. Similarly, it is guaranteed to ﬁnd a set of near-minimal
cost that achieves a desired quota of utility (Wolsey, 1982), using near-minimum average time to do
so (Streeter & Golovin, 2008). Besides guaranteeing theoretical performance bounds, submodular-
ity allows us to speed up algorithms without loss of solution quality by using lazy evaluations (Mi-
noux, 1978), often leading to performance improvements of several orders of magnitude (Leskovec,
Krause, Guestrin, Faloutsos, VanBriesen, & Glance, 2007). Submodularity has been shown to be
very useful in a variety of problems in artiﬁcial intelligence (Krause & Guestrin, 2009a).
The challenge in generalizing submodularity to adaptive planning — where the action taken in
each step depends on information obtained in the previous steps — is that feasible solutions are
now policies (decision trees or conditional plans) instead of subsets. We propose a natural gener-
alization of the diminishing returns property for adaptive problems, which reduces to the classical
characterization of submodular set functions for deterministic distributions. We show how these
results of Nemhauser et al. (1978), Wolsey (1982), Streeter and Golovin (2008), and Minoux (1978)
generalize to the adaptive setting. Hence, we demonstrate how adaptive submodular optimization
problems enjoy theoretical and practical beneﬁts similar to those of classical, nonadaptive submod-
ular problems. We further demonstrate the usefulness and generality of the concept by showing
how it captures known results in stochastic optimization and active learning as special cases, admits
tighter performance bounds, leads to natural generalizations and allows us to solve new problems
for which no performance guarantees were known.
As a ﬁrst example, consider the problem of deploying (or controlling) a collection of sensors to
monitor some spatial phenomenon. Each sensor can cover a region depending on its sensing range.
Suppose we would like to ﬁnd the best subset ofk locations to place the sensors. In this application,
intuitively, adding a sensor helps more if we have placed few sensors so far and helps less if we have
already placed many sensors. We can formalize this diminishing returns property using the notion
of submodularity – the total area covered by the sensors is a submodular function deﬁned over all
sets of locations. Krause and Guestrin (2007) show that many more realistic utility functions in
sensor placement (such as the improvement in prediction accuracy w.r.t. some probabilistic model)
are submodular as well. Now consider the following stochastic variant: Instead of deploying a ﬁxed
set of sensors, we deploy one sensor at a time. With a certain probability, deployed sensors can fail,
and our goal is to maximize the area covered by the functioning sensors. Thus, when deploying
the next sensor, we need to take into account which of the sensors we deployed in the past failed.
This problem has been studied by Asadpour, Nazerzadeh, and Saberi (2008) for the case where
each sensor fails independently at random. In this paper, we show that the coverage objective is
adaptive submodular, and use this concept to handle much more general settings (where, e.g., rather
than all-or-nothing failures there are different types of sensor failures of varying severity). We also
consider a related problem where the goal is to place the minimum number of sensors to achieve the
maximum possible sensor coverage (i.e., the coverage obtained by deploying sensors everywhere),
or more generally the goal may be to achieve any ﬁxed percentage of the maximum possible sensor
coverage. Under the ﬁrst goal, the problem is equivalent to one studied by Goemans and V ondr ´ak
(2006), and generalizes a problem studied by Liu, Parthasarathy, Ranganathan, and Yang (2008).
As with the maximum coverage version, adaptive submodularity allows us to recover and generalize
previous results.
As another example, consider a viral marketing problem, where we are given a social network,
and we want to inﬂuence as many people as possible in the network to buy some product. We do that
by giving the product for free to a subset of the people, and hope that they convince their friends
428

ADAPTIVE SUBMODULARITY : T HEORY AND APPLICATIONS
to buy the product as well. Formally, we have a graph, and each edge e is labeled by a number
0≤ pe≤ 1. We “inﬂuence” a subset of nodes in the graph, and for each inﬂuenced node, their
neighbors get randomly inﬂuenced according to the probability annotated on the edge connecting
the nodes. This process repeats until no further node gets inﬂuenced. Kempe, Kleinberg, and
Tardos (2003) show that the set function which quantiﬁes the expected number of nodes inﬂuenced
is submodular. A natural stochastic variant of the problem is where we pick a node, get to see
which nodes it inﬂuenced, then adaptively pick the next node based on these observations and so
on. We show that a large class of such adaptive inﬂuence maximization problems satisﬁes adaptive
submodularity.
Our third application is in active learning, where we are given an unlabeled data set, and we
would like to adaptively pick a small set of examples whose labels imply all other labels. The same
problem arises in automated diagnosis, where we have hypotheses about the state of the system (e.g.,
what illness a patient has), and would like to perform tests to identify the correct hypothesis. In both
domains we want to pick examples / tests to shrink the remaining version space (the set of consistent
hypotheses) as quickly as possible. Here, we show that the reduction in version space probability
mass is adaptive submodular, and use that observation to prove that the adaptive greedy algorithm
is a near-optimal querying policy, recovering and generalizing results by Kosaraju, Przytycka, and
Borgstrom (1999) and Dasgupta (2004). Our results for active learning and automated diagnosis
are also related to recent results of Guillory and Bilmes (2010, 2011) who study generalizations of
submodular set cover to an interactive setting. In contrast to our approach however, Guillory and
Bilmes analyze worst-case costs, and use rather different technical deﬁnitions and proof techniques.
We summarize our main contributions below, and provide a more technical summary in Table 1.
At a high level, our main contributions are:
• We consider a particular class of partially observable adaptive stochastic optimization prob-
lems, which we prove to be hard to approximate in general.
• We introduce the concept ofadaptive submodularity, and prove that if a problem instance sat-
isﬁes this property, a simple adaptive greedy policy performs near-optimally, for both adaptive
stochastic maximization and coverage, and also a natural min-sum objective.
• We show how adaptive submodularity can be exploited by allowing the use of an accelerated
adaptive greedy algorithm using lazy evaluations, and how we can obtain data-dependent
bounds on the optimum.
• We illustrate adaptive submodularity on several realistic problems, including Stochastic Max-
imum Coverage, Stochastic Submodular Coverage, Adaptive Viral Marketing, and Active
Learning. For these applications, adaptive submodularity allows us to recover known results
and prove natural generalizations.
1.1 Organization
This article is organized as follows. In§2 (page 430) we set up notation and formally deﬁne the rel-
evant adaptive optimization problems for general objective functions.For the reader’s convenience,
we have also provided a reference table of important symbols on page 480.In§3 (page 433) we re-
view the classical notion of submodularity and introduce the novel adaptive submodularity property.
429

GOLOVIN & KRAUSE
Name New Results Location
A.S. Maximization Tight (1− 1/e)-approx. for A.M.S. objectives §5.1,
page 438
A.S. Min Cost Coverage Tight logarithmic approx. for A.M.S. objectives §5.2,
page 440
A.S. Min Sum Cover Tight 4-approx. for A.M.S. objectives §5.3,
page 443
Data Dependent Bounds Generalization to A.M.S. functions §5.1,
page 438
Accelerated Greedy Generalization of lazy evaluations to the adaptive setting §4, page 436
Stochastic Submodular
Maximization
Generalization of the previous (1− 1/e)-approx. to
arbitrary per–item set distributions, and to item costs
§6, page 445
Stochastic Set Cover Generalization of the previous (ln(n) + 1)-approx. to
arbitrary per-item set distributions, with item costs
§7, page 446
Adaptive Viral
Marketing
Adaptive analog of previous (1− 1/e)-approx. for non-
adaptive viral marketing, under more general reward
functions; tight logarithmic approx. for the adaptive min
cost cover version
§8, page 448
Active Learning Improved approx. factor of generalized binary search
and its approximate versions with and without item costs
§9, page 454
Hardness in the absence
of Adapt. Submodularity
Ω(|E|1−ϵ)-approximation hardness for A.S. Maximiza-
tion, Min Cost Coverage, and Min-Sum Cover, if f is
not adaptive submodular.
§12,
page 464
Table 1: Summary of our theoretical results. A.S. is shorthand for “adaptive stochastic”, and A.M.S.
is shorthand for “adaptive monotone submodular.”
In§4 (page 436) we introduce the adaptive greedy policy, as well as an accelerated variant. In §5
(page 438) we discuss the theoretical guarantees that the adaptive greedy policy enjoys when applied
to problems with adaptive submodular objectives. Sections 6 through 9 provide examples on how to
apply the adaptive submodular framework to various applications, namely Stochastic Submodular
Maximization (§6, page 445), Stochastic Submodular Coverage (§7, page 446), Adaptive Viral Mar-
keting (§8, page 448), and Active Learning (§9, page 454). In §10 (page 459) we report empirical
results on two sensor selection problems. In §11 (page 462) we discuss the adaptivity gap of the
problems we consider, and in §12 (page 464) we prove hardness results indicating that problems
which are not adaptive submodular can be extremely inapproximable under reasonable complexity
assumptions. We review related work in §13 (page 465) and provide concluding remarks in §14
(page 467). The Appendix (page 468) gives details of how to incorporate item costs and includes
all of the proofs omitted from the main text.
2. Adaptive Stochastic Optimization
We start by introducing notation and deﬁning the general class of adaptive optimization problems
that we address in this paper. For sake of clarity, we will illustrate our notation using the sensor
placement application mentioned in§1. We give examples of other applications in§6,§7,§8, and§9.
430

ADAPTIVE SUBMODULARITY : T HEORY AND APPLICATIONS
2.1 Items and Realizations
LetE be a ﬁnite set of items (e.g., sensor locations). Each item e∈ E is in a particular (initially
unknown) state from a set O of possible states (describing whether a sensor placed at location e
would malfunction or not). We represent the item states using a function φ : E → O, called a
realization (of the states of all items in the ground set). Thus, we say that φ(e) is the state of e
under realization φ. We use Φ to denote a random realization. We take a Bayesian approach and
assume that there is a known prior probability distributionp (φ) := P [Φ =φ] over realizations (e.g.,
modeling that sensors fail independently with failure probability), so that we can compute posterior
distributions2. We will consider problems where we sequentially pick an item e∈ E, get to see
its state Φ(e), pick the next item, get to see its state, and so on (e.g., place a sensor, see whether it
fails, and so on). After each pick, our observations so far can be represented as a partial realization
ψ, a function from some subset of E (i.e., the set of items that we already picked) to their states
(e.g.,ψ encodes where we placed sensors and which of them failed). For notational convenience,
we sometimes representψ as a relation, so thatψ⊆E×O equals{(e,o ) :ψ(e) =o}. We use the
notation dom(ψ) ={e :∃o.(e,o )∈ψ} to refer to the domain of ψ (i.e., the set of items observed
inψ). A partial realization ψ is consistent with a realization φ if they are equal everywhere in the
domain of ψ. In this case we write φ∼ ψ. If ψ and ψ′ are both consistent with some φ, and
dom(ψ)⊆ dom(ψ′), we sayψ is a subrealization ofψ′. Equivalently,ψ is a subrealization ofψ′ if
and only if, when viewed as relations,ψ⊆ψ′.
Partial realizations are similar to the notion of “belief states” in Partially Observable Markov
Decision Problems (POMDPs), as they encode the effect of all actions taken (items selected) and
observations made, and determine our posterior belief about the state of the world (i.e., the state of
all itemse not yet selected,p (φ|ψ) := P [Φ =φ| Φ∼ψ]).
2.2 Policies
We encode our adaptive strategy for picking items as a policyπ, which is a function from a set of
partial realizations to E, specifying which item to pick next under a particular set of observations
(e.g.,π chooses the next sensor location given where we have placed sensors so far, and whether they
failed or not). We also allow randomized policies that are functions from a set of partial realizations
to distributions onE, though our emphasis will primarily be on deterministic policies. Ifψ is not in
the domain ofπ, the policy terminates (stops picking items) upon observation ofψ. We use dom(π)
to denote the domain of π. Technically, we require that dom(π) be closed under subrealizations.
That is, if ψ′∈ dom(π) andψ is a subrealization of ψ′ thenψ∈ dom(π). We use the notation
E(π,φ ) to refer to the set of items selected by π under realization φ. Each deterministic policy π
can be associated with a decision tree Tπ in a natural way (see Fig. 1 for an illustration). Here, we
adopt a policy-centric view that admits concise notation, though we ﬁnd the decision tree view to
be valuable conceptually.
Since partial realizations are similar to POMDP belief states, our deﬁnition of policies is similar
to the notion of policies in POMDPs, which are usually deﬁned as functions from belief states
to actions. We will further discuss the relationship between the stochastic optimization problems
considered in this paper and POMDPs in Section 13.
2. In some situations, we may not have exact knowledge of the prior p (φ). Obtaining algorithms that are robust to
incorrect priors remains an interesting source of open problems. We brieﬂy discuss some robustness guarantees of
our algorithm in§4 on page 437.
431

GOLOVIN & KRAUSE
Figure 1: Illustration of a policy π, its corresponding decision tree representation, and the decision
tree representation ofπ[2], the level 2 truncation ofπ (as deﬁned in§5.1).
2.3 Adaptive Stochastic Maximization, Coverage, and Min-Sum Coverage
We wish to maximize, subject to some constraints, a utility function f : 2E×OE → R≥0 that
depends on which items we pick and which state each item is in (e.g., modeling the total area
covered by the working sensors). Based on this notation, the expected utility of a policy π is
favg(π) := E [f(E(π, Φ), Φ)] where the expectation is taken with respect to p (φ). The goal of the
Adaptive Stochastic Maximization problem is to ﬁnd a policyπ∗ such that
π∗∈ arg max
π
favg(π) subject to|E(π,φ )|≤ k for allφ, (2.1)
wherek is a budget on how many items can be picked (e.g., we would like to adaptively choose k
sensor locations such that the working sensors provide as much information as possible in expecta-
tion).
Alternatively, we can specify a quotaQ of utility that we would like to obtain, and try to ﬁnd the
cheapest policy achieving that quota (e.g., we would like to achieve a certain amount of information,
as cheaply as possible in expectation). Formally, we deﬁne the average cost cavg(π) of a policy as
the expected number of items it picks, so thatcavg(π) := E [|E(π, Φ)|]. Our goal is then to ﬁnd
π∗∈ arg min
π
cavg(π) such thatf(E(π,φ ),φ )≥Q for allφ, (2.2)
i.e., the policyπ∗ that minimizes the expected number of items picked such that under all possible
realizations, at least utility Q is achieved. We call Problem 2.2 the Adaptive Stochastic Minimum
Cost Cover problem. We will also consider the problem where we want to minimize the worst-case
costcwc(π) := maxφ|E(π,φ )|. This worst-case costcwc(π) is the cost incurred under adversarially
chosen realizations, or equivalently the depth of the deepest leaf inTπ, the decision tree associated
withπ.
Yet another important variant is to minimize the average time required by a policy to obtain
its utility. Formally, let u(π,t ) be the expected utility obtained by π after t steps3, let Q =
E [f(E, Φ)] be the maximum possible expected utility, and deﬁne the min-sum cost cΣ(π) of a
policy as cΣ(π) := ∑∞
t=0 (Q−u(π,t )). We then deﬁne the Adaptive Stochastic Min-Sum Cover
problem as the search for
π∗∈ arg min
π
cΣ(π). (2.3)
3. For a more formal deﬁnition of u(π,t ), see§A.5 on page 478.
432

ADAPTIVE SUBMODULARITY : T HEORY AND APPLICATIONS
Unfortunately, as we will show in§12, even for linear functionsf, i.e., those wheref(A,φ ) =∑
e∈Awe,φ is simply the sum of weights (depending on the realization φ), Problems (2.1), (2.2),
and (2.3) are hard to approximate under reasonable complexity theoretic assumptions. Despite the
hardness of the general problems, in the following sections we will identify conditions that are
sufﬁcient to allow us to approximately solve them.
2.4 Incorporating Item Costs
Instead of quantifying the cost of a set E(π,φ ) by the number of elements|E(π,φ )|, we can also
consider the case where each item e∈ E has a cost c(e), and the cost of a set S⊆ E isc(S) =∑
e∈Sc(e). We can then consider variants of Problems (2.1), (2.2), and (2.3) with the |E(π,φ )|
replaced byc(E(π,φ )). For clarity of presentation, we will focus on the unit cost case, i.e.,c(e) = 1
for alle, and explain how our results generalize to the non-uniform case in the Appendix.
3. Adaptive Submodularity
We ﬁrst review the classical notion of submodular set functions, and then introduce the novel notion
of adaptive submodularity.
3.1 Background on Submodularity
Let us ﬁrst consider the very special case where p (φ) is deterministic or, equivalently, |O| = 1
(e.g., in our sensor placement applications, sensors never fail). In this case, the realization φ is
known to the decision maker in advance, and thus there is no beneﬁt in adaptive selection. Given
the realizationφ, Problem (2.1) is equivalent to ﬁnding a setA∗⊆E such that
A∗∈ arg max
A⊆E
f(A,φ ) such that|A|≤ k. (3.1)
For most interesting classes of utility functions f, this is an NP-hard optimization problem. How-
ever, in many practical problems, such as those mentioned in§1,f(A) =f(A,φ ) satisﬁes submod-
ularity. A set function f : 2E→ R is called submodular if, wheneverA⊆B⊆E ande∈E\B
it holds that
f(A∪{e})−f(A)≥f(B∪{e})−f(B), (3.2)
i.e., adding e to the smaller set A increases f by at least as much as adding e to the superset B.
Furthermore,f is called monotone, if, whenever A⊆ B it holds that f(A)≤ f(B) (e.g., adding
a sensor can never reduce the amount of information obtained). A celebrated result by Nemhauser
et al. (1978) states that for monotone submodular functions with f(∅) = 0 , a simple greedy algo-
rithm that starts with the empty set,A0 =∅ and chooses
Ai+1 =Ai∪{ arg max
e∈E\Ai
f(Ai∪{e})} (3.3)
guarantees thatf(Ak)≥ (1− 1/e) max|A|≤kf(A). Thus, the greedy setAk obtains at least a (1−
1/e) fraction of the optimal value achievable using k elements. Furthermore, Feige (1998) shows
that this result is tight if P⁄= NP; under this assumptionno polynomial time algorithmcan do strictly
better than the greedy algorithm, i.e., achieve a(1− 1/e +ϵ)-approximation for any constantϵ> 0,
even for the special case of Maximum k-Cover where f(A) is the cardinality of the union of sets
433

GOLOVIN & KRAUSE
indexed byA. Similarly, Wolsey (1982) shows that the same greedy algorithm also near-optimally
solves the deterministic case of Problem (2.2), called the Minimum Submodular Cover problem:
A∗∈ arg min
A⊆E
|A| such thatf(A)≥Q. (3.4)
Pick the ﬁrst set A𝓁 constructed by the greedy algorithm such that f(A𝓁)≥ Q. Then, for integer-
valued submodular functions,𝓁 is at most|A∗|(1 + log maxef(e)), i.e., the greedy set is at most a
logarithmic factor larger than the smallest set achieving quotaQ. For the special case of Set Cover,
wheref(A) is the cardinality of a union of sets indexed by A, this result matches a lower bound
by Feige (1998): Unless NP⊆ DTIME(nO(log logn)), Set Cover is hard to approximate by a factor
better than (1−ε) lnQ, whereQ is the number of elements to be covered.
Now let us relax the assumption that p (φ) is deterministic. In this case, we may still want to
ﬁnd a non-adaptive solution (i.e., a constant policy πA that always picks set A independently of
Φ) maximizing favg(πA). If f is pointwise submodular, i.e., f(A,φ ) is submodular in A for any
ﬁxed φ, the function f(A) = favg(πA) is submodular, since nonnegative linear combinations of
submodular functions remain submodular. Thus, the greedy algorithm allows us to ﬁnd a near-
optimal non-adaptive policy. That is, in our sensor placement example, if we are willing to commit
to all locations before ﬁnding out whether the sensors fail or not, the greedy algorithm can provide
a good solution to this non-adaptive problem.
However, in practice, we may be more interested in obtaining a non-constant policy π, that
adaptively chooses items based on previous observations (e.g., takes into account which sensors are
working before placing the next sensor). In many settings, selecting items adaptively offers huge
advantages, analogous to the advantage of binary search over sequential (linear) search4. Thus, the
question is whether there is a natural extension of submodularity to policies. In the following, we
will develop such a notion – adaptive submodularity.
3.2 Adaptive Monotonicity and Submodularity
The key challenge is to ﬁnd appropriate generalizations of monotonicity and of the diminishing
returns condition (3.2). We begin by again considering the very special case where p (φ) is de-
terministic, so that the policies are non-adaptive. In this case a policy π simply speciﬁes a se-
quence of items (e1,e 2,...,e r) which it selects in order. Monotonicity in this context can be
characterized as the property that “the marginal beneﬁt of selecting an item is always nonnega-
tive,” meaning that for all such sequences (e1,e 2,...,e r), items e and 1≤ i≤ r it holds that
f({ej :j≤i}∪{ e})− f({ej :j≤i}) ≥ 0. Similarly, submodularity can be viewed as the
property that “selecting an item later never increases its marginal beneﬁt,” meaning that for all
sequences (e1,e 2,...,e r), items e, and all i ≤ r, f({ej :j≤i}∪{ e})− f({ej :j≤i}) ≥
f({ej :j≤r}∪{ e})−f({ej :j≤r}).
We take these views of monotonicity and submodularity when deﬁning their adaptive analogues,
by using an appropriate generalization of the marginal beneﬁt. When moving to the general adaptive
setting, the challenge is that the items’ states are now random and only revealed upon selection. A
natural approach is thus to condition on observations (i.e., partial realizations of selected items),
and take the expectation with respect to the items that we consider selecting. Hence, we deﬁne our
4. We provide a well–known example in active learning that illustrates this phenomenon crisply in §9; see Fig. 4 on
page 454. We consider the general question of the magnitude of the potential beneﬁts of adaptivity in§11 on page 462
.
434

ADAPTIVE SUBMODULARITY : T HEORY AND APPLICATIONS
adaptive monotonicity and submodularity properties in terms of the conditional expected marginal
beneﬁt of an item.
Deﬁnition 3.1 (Conditional Expected Marginal Beneﬁt) . Given a partial realization ψ and an
iteme, the conditional expected marginal beneﬁt ofe conditioned on having observed ψ, denoted
∆(e|ψ), is
∆(e|ψ) := E
[
f(dom(ψ)∪{e}, Φ)−f(dom(ψ), Φ)
⏐⏐⏐⏐ Φ∼ψ
]
(3.5)
where the expectation is computed with respect to p (φ|ψ) = P [Φ =φ| Φ∼ψ]. Similarly, the
conditional expected marginal beneﬁt of a policyπ is
∆(π|ψ) := E
[
f(dom(ψ)∪E(π, Φ), Φ)−f(dom(ψ), Φ)
⏐⏐⏐⏐ Φ∼ψ
]
. (3.6)
In our sensor placement example, ∆(e|ψ) quantiﬁes the expected amount of additional area cov-
ered by placing a sensor at location e, in expectation over the posterior distribution pΦ(e)(o) :=
P [Φ(e) =o| Φ∼ψ] of whether the sensor will fail or not, and taking into account the area cov-
ered by the placed working sensors as encoded by ψ. Note that the beneﬁt we have accrued upon
observingψ (and hence after having selected the items in dom(ψ)) is E [f(dom(ψ), Φ) | Φ∼ψ],
which is the beneﬁt term subtracted out in Eq. (3.5) and Eq. (3.6). Similarly, the expected total
beneﬁt obtained after observing ψ and then selecting e is E [f(dom(ψ)∪{e}, Φ) | Φ∼ψ]. The
corresponding beneﬁt for running π after observingψ is slightly more complex. Under realization
φ∼ ψ, the ﬁnal cumulative beneﬁt will be f(dom(ψ)∪E(π,φ ),φ ). Taking the expectation with
respect to p (φ|ψ) and subtracting out the beneﬁt already obtained by dom(ψ) then yields the
conditional expected marginal beneﬁt ofπ.
We are now ready to introduce our generalizations of monotonicity and submodularity to the
adaptive setting:
Deﬁnition 3.2 (Adaptive Monotonicity). A functionf : 2E×OE→ R≥0 is adaptive monotonewith
respect to distributionp (φ) if the conditional expected marginal beneﬁt of any item is nonnegative,
i.e., for allψ with P [Φ∼ψ]> 0 and alle∈E we have
∆(e|ψ)≥ 0. (3.7)
Deﬁnition 3.3 (Adaptive Submodularity). A functionf : 2E×OE→ R≥0 is adaptive submodular
with respect to distributionp (φ) if the conditional expected marginal beneﬁt of any ﬁxed item does
not increase as more items are selected and their states are observed. Formally, f is adaptive
submodular w.r.t.p (φ) if for all ψ andψ′ such thatψ is a subrealization ofψ′ (i.e.,ψ⊆ ψ′), and
for alle∈E\ dom(ψ′), we have
∆(e|ψ)≥ ∆
(
e|ψ′)
. (3.8)
From the decision tree perspective, the condition ∆(e|ψ)≥ ∆(e|ψ′) amounts to saying that
for any decision treeT , if we are at a nodev inT which selects an iteme, and compare the expected
marginal beneﬁt of e selected at v with the expected marginal beneﬁt e would have obtained if it
were selected at an ancestor of v in T , then the latter must be no smaller than the former. Note
that when comparing the two expected marginal beneﬁts, there is a difference in both the set of
435

GOLOVIN & KRAUSE
items previously selected (i.e., dom(ψ) vs. dom(ψ′)) and in the distribution over realizations (i.e.,
p (φ|ψ) vs.p (φ|ψ′)). It is also worth emphasizing that adaptive submodularity is deﬁned relative
to the distribution p (φ) over realizations; it is possible that f is adaptive submodular with respect
to one distribution, but not with respect to another.
We will give concrete examples of adaptive monotone and adaptive submodular functions that
arise in the applications introduced in §1 in§6,§7,§8, and§9. In the Appendix, we will explain
how the notion of adaptive submodularity can be extended to handle non-uniform costs (since, e.g.,
the cost of placing a sensor at an easily accessible location may be smaller than at a location that is
hard to get to).
3.3 Properties of Adaptive Submodular Functions
It can be seen that adaptive monotonicity and adaptive submodularity enjoy similar closure prop-
erties as monotone submodular functions. In particular, if w1,...,w m ≥ 0 and f1,...,f m are
adaptive monotone submodular w.r.t. distributionp (φ), thenf(A,φ ) = ∑m
i=1wifi(A,φ ) is adap-
tive monotone submodular w.r.t.p (φ). Similarly, for a ﬁxed constantc≥ 0 and adaptive monotone
submodular function f, the function g(E,φ ) = min( f(E,φ ),c ) is adaptive monotone submod-
ular. Thus, adaptive monotone submodularity is preserved by nonnegative linear combinations
and by truncation. Adaptive monotone submodularity is also preserved by restriction, so that if
f : 2E×OE→ R≥0 is adaptive monotone submodular w.r.t.p (φ), then for any e∈E, the func-
tiong : 2E\{e}×OE→ R≥0 deﬁned by g(A,φ ) := f(A,φ ) for allA⊆E\{e} and allφ is also
adaptive submodular w.r.t.p (φ). Finally, iff : 2E×OE→ R≥0 is adaptive monotone submodular
w.r.t.p (φ) then for each partial realizationψ the conditional functiong(A,φ ) :=f(A∪dom(ψ),φ )
is adaptive monotone submodular w.r.t.p (φ|ψ) := P [Φ =φ| Φ∼ψ].
3.4 What Problem Characteristics Suggest Adaptive Submodularity?
Adaptive submodularity is a diminishing returns property for policies. Speaking informally, it can
be applied in situations where there is an objective function to be optimized does not feature syner-
gies in the beneﬁts of items conditioned on observations. In some cases, the primary objective might
not have this property, but a suitably chosen proxy of it does, as is the case with active learning with
persistent noise (Golovin, Krause, & Ray, 2010; Bellala & Scott, 2010). We give example appli-
cations in§6 through§9. It is also worth mentioning where adaptive submodularity is not directly
applicable. An extreme example of synergistic effects between items conditioned on observations
is the class of “treasure hunting” instances used to prove Theorem 12.1 on page 464, where the (bi-
nary) state of certain groups of items encode the treasure’s location in a complex manner. Another
problem feature which adaptive submodularity does not directly address is the possibility that items
selection can alter the underlying realizationφ, as is the case for the problem of optimizing policies
for general POMDPs.
4. The Adaptive Greedy Policy
The classical non-adaptive greedy algorithm (3.3) has a natural generalization to the adaptive set-
ting. The greedy policyπgreedy tries, at each iteration, to myopically increase the expected objective
value, given its current observations. That is, suppose f : 2E×OE→ R≥0 is the objective, and
ψ is the partial realization indicating the states of items selected so far. Then the greedy policy will
436

ADAPTIVE SUBMODULARITY : T HEORY AND APPLICATIONS
select the item e maximizing the expected increase in value, conditioned on the observed states of
items it has already selected (i.e., conditioned on Φ∼ ψ). That is, it will select e to maximize the
conditional expected marginal beneﬁt ∆(e|ψ) as deﬁned in Eq. (3.5). Pseudocode of the adaptive
greedy algorithm is given in Algorithm 1. The only difference to the classic, non-adaptive greedy
algorithm studied by Nemhauser et al. (1978), is Line 6, where an observationΦ(e∗) of the selected
iteme∗ is obtained. Note that the algorithms in this section are presented for Adaptive Stochastic
Maximization. For the coverage objectives, we simply keep selecting items as prescribed byπgreedy
until achieving the quota on objective value (for the min-cost objective) or until we have selected
every item (for the min-sum objective).
4.1 Incorporating Item Costs
The adaptive greedy algorithm can be naturally modiﬁed to handle non-uniform item costs by re-
placing its selection rule by
e∗∈ arg max
e
∆(e|ψ)
c(e) .
In the following, we will focus on the uniform cost case (c≡ 1), and defer the analysis with costs
to the Appendix.
4.2 Approximate Greedy Selection
In some applications, ﬁnding an item maximizing ∆(e|ψ) may be computationally intractable, and
the best we can do is ﬁnd an α-approximation to the best greedy selection. This means we ﬁnd an
e′ such that
∆
(
e′|ψ
)
≥ 1
α max
e
∆(e|ψ).
We call a policy which always selects such an item anα-approximate greedy policy.
Input: Budgetk; ground setE; distributionp (φ); functionf.
Output: SetA⊆E of sizek
begin
A←∅ ;ψ←∅ ;1
fori = 1 tok do2
foreach e∈E\A do compute ∆(e|ψ) = E [f(A∪{e}, Φ)−f(A, Φ)| Φ∼ψ] ;3
Selecte∗∈ arg maxe ∆(e|ψ);4
SetA←A∪{e∗};5
Observe Φ(e∗); Setψ←ψ∪{ (e∗, Φ(e∗))};6
end
Algorithm 1: The adaptive greedy algorithm, which implements the greedy policy.
4.3 Robustness & Approximate Greedy Selection
As we will show,α-approximate greedy policies have performance guarantees on several problems.
The fact that these performance guarantees of greedy policies are robust to approximate greedy
selection suggests a particular robustness guarantee against incorrect priors p (φ). Speciﬁcally, if
our incorrect priorp′ is such that when we evaluate ∆(e|ψ) we err by a multiplicative factor of at
437

GOLOVIN & KRAUSE
mostα, then when we compute the greedy policy with respect to p′ we are actually implementing
anα-approximate greedy policy (with respect to the true prior), and hence obtain the corresponding
guarantees. For example, a sufﬁcient condition for erring by at most a multiplicative factor of α is
that there existsc≤ 1 andd≥ 1 withα =d/c such thatcp (φ)≤p′ (φ)≤dp (φ) for allφ, where
p is the true prior.
4.4 Lazy Evaluations and the Accelerated Adaptive Greedy Algorithm
The deﬁnition of adaptive submodularity allows us to implement an “accelerated” version of the
adaptive greedy algorithm using lazy evaluations of marginal beneﬁts as originally suggested for
the non-adaptive case by Minoux (1978). The idea is as follows. Suppose we run πgreedy under
some ﬁxed realization φ, and select items e1,e 2,...,e k. Let ψi :={(ej,φ (ej) :j≤i)} be the
partial realizations observed during the run of πgreedy. The adaptive greedy algorithm computes
∆(e|ψi) for all e∈ E and 0≤ i < k, unless e∈ dom(ψi). Naively, the algorithm thus needs
to compute Θ(|E|k) marginal beneﬁts (which can be expensive to compute). The key insight is
that i↦→ ∆(e|ψi) is nonincreasing for all e∈ E, because of the adaptive submodularity of the
objective. Hence, if when deciding which item to select as ei we know ∆(e′|ψj)≤ ∆(e|ψi) for
some itemse′ ande andj < i, then we may conclude ∆(e′|ψi)≤ ∆(e|ψi) and hence eliminate
the need to compute ∆(e′|ψi). The accelerated version of the adaptive greedy algorithm exploits
this observation in a principled manner, by computing ∆(e|ψ) for items e in decreasing order of
the upper bounds known on them, until it ﬁnds an item whose value is at least as great as the upper
bounds of all other items. Pseudocode of this version of the adaptive greedy algorithm is given in
Algorithm 2.
In the non-adaptive setting, the use of lazy evaluations has been shown to signiﬁcantly reduce
running times in practice (Leskovec et al., 2007). We evaluated the naive and accelerated implemen-
tations of the adaptive greedy algorithm on two sensor selection problems, and obtained speedup
factors that range from roughly 4 to 40 for those problems. See§10 on page 459 for details.
5. Guarantees for the Greedy Policy
In this section we show that if the objective function is adaptive submodular with respect to the
probabilistic model of the environment in which we operate, then the greedy policy inherits pre-
cisely the performance guarantees of the greedy algorithm for classic (non-adaptive) submodular
maximization and submodular coverage problems, such as Maximum k-Cover and Minimum Set
Cover, as well as min-sum submodular coverage problems, such as Min-Sum Set Cover. In fact,
we will show that this holds true more generally: α–approximate greedy policies inherit precisely
the performance guarantees ofα–approximate greedy algorithms for these classic problems. These
guarantees suggest that adaptive submodularity is an appropriate generalization of submodularity
to policies. In this section we focus on the unit cost case (i.e., every item has the same cost). In
the Appendix we provide the proofs omitted in this section, and show how our results extend to
non-uniform item costs if we greedily maximize the expected beneﬁt/cost ratio.
5.1 The Maximum Coverage Objective
In this section we consider the maximum coverage objective, where the goal is to select k items
adaptively to maximize their expected value. The task of maximizing expected value subject to
438

ADAPTIVE SUBMODULARITY : T HEORY AND APPLICATIONS
Input: Budgetk; ground setE; distributionp (φ); functionf.
Output: SetA⊆E of sizek
begin
A←∅ ;ψ←∅ ; Priority QueueQ← EMPTY QUEUE ;1
foreach e∈E doQ. insert(e, +∞);2
fori = 1 tok do3
δmax←−∞ ;emax← NULL ;4
while δmax<Q. maxPriority( ) do5
e←Q. pop( );6
δ← ∆(e|ψ) = E [f(A∪{e}, Φ)−f(A, Φ)| Φ∼ψ];7
Q. insert(e,δ );8
if δmax<δ then9
δmax←δ;emax←e;10
A←A∪{emax};Q. remove(emax);11
Observe Φ(emax); Setψ←ψ∪{ (emax, Φ(emax))};12
end
Algorithm 2: The accelerated version of the adaptive greedy algorithm. Here,Q. insert(e,δ )
inserts e with priority δ, Q. pop( ) removes and returns the item with greatest priority,
Q. maxPriority( ) returns the maximum priority of the elements in Q, and Q. remove(e)
deletese fromQ.
more complex constraints, such as matroid constraints and intersections of matroid constraints, is
considered in the work of Golovin and Krause (2011). Before stating our result, we require the
following deﬁnition.
Deﬁnition 5.1 (Policy Truncation). For a policyπ, deﬁne the level-k-truncationπ[k] ofπ to be the
policy obtained by running π until it terminates or until it selects k items, and then terminating.
Formally,dom(π[k]) ={ψ∈ dom(π) : |ψ|<k}, andπ[k](ψ) =π(ψ) for allψ∈ dom(π[k]).
We have the following result, which generalizes the classic result of the work of Nemhauser et al.
(1978) that the greedy algorithm achieves a(1− 1/e)-approximation to the problem of maximizing
monotone submodular functions under a cardinality constraint. By setting 𝓁 = k and α = 1 in
Theorem 5.2, we see that the greedy policy which selectsk items adaptively obtains at least(1−1/e)
of the value of the optimal policy that selectsk items adaptively, measured with respect tofavg. For a
proof see Theorem A.10 in Appendix A.3, which generalizes Theorem 5.2 to nonuniform item costs.
Theorem 5.2. Fix anyα≥ 1. If f is adaptive monotone and adaptive submodular with respect to
the distributionp (φ), andπ is anα-approximate greedy policy, then for all policiesπ∗ and positive
integers𝓁 andk,
favg(π[𝓁])>
(
1−e−𝓁/αk
)
favg(π∗
[k]).
In particular, with 𝓁 = k this implies any α-approximate greedy policy achieves a
(
1−e−1/α)
approximation to the expected reward of the best policy, if both are terminated after running for an
equal number of steps.
If the greedy rule can be implemented only with small absolute error rather than small relative
error, i.e., ∆(e′|ψ)≥ maxe ∆(e|ψ)−ε, an argument similar to that used to prove Theorem 5.2
439

GOLOVIN & KRAUSE
shows that
favg(π[𝓁])≥
(
1−e−𝓁/k
)
favg(π∗
[k])−𝓁ε.
This is important, since small absolute error can always be achieved (with high probability) when-
everf can be evaluated efﬁciently, and samplingp (φ|ψ) is efﬁcient. In this case, we can approxi-
mate
∆(e|ψ)≈ 1
N
N∑
i=1
[
f(dom(ψ)∪{e},φi)−f(dom(ψ),φi)
]
,
whereφi are sampled i.i.d. fromp (φ|ψ).
5.1.1 D ATA DEPENDENT BOUNDS
For the maximum coverage objective, adaptive submodular functions have another attractive feature:
they allow us to obtain data dependent bounds on the optimum, in a manner similar to the bounds
for the non-adaptive case (Minoux, 1978). Consider the non-adaptive problem of maximizing a
monotone submodular function f : 2A→ R≥0 subject to the constraint |A|≤ k. Let A∗ be an
optimal solution, and ﬁx anyA⊆E. Then
f(A∗)≤f(A) + max
B:|B|≤k
∑
e∈B
(f(A∪{e})−f(A)) (5.1)
because settingB =A∗ we havef(A∗)≤f(A∪B)≤f(A)+∑
e∈B (f(A∪{e})−f(A)). Note
that unlike the original objective, we can easily compute maxB:|B|≤k
∑
e∈B (f(A∪{e})−f(A))
by computing δ(e) := f(A∪{e})−f(A) for each e, and summing the k largest values. Hence
we can quickly compute an upper bound on our distance from the optimal value, f(A∗)−f(A).
In practice, such data-dependent bounds can be much tighter than the problem-independent per-
formance guarantees of Nemhauser et al. (1978) for the greedy algorithm (Leskovec et al., 2007).
Further note that these bounds hold for any setA, not just sets selected by the greedy algorithm.
These data dependent bounds have the following analogue for adaptive monotone submodular
functions. See Appendix A.2 for a proof.
Lemma 5.3 (The Adaptive Data Dependent Bound). Suppose we have made observations ψ after
selecting dom(ψ). Let π∗ be any policy such that |E(π∗,φ )|≤ k for all φ. Then for adaptive
monotone submodularf
∆(π∗|ψ) ≤ max
A⊆E,|A|≤k
∑
e∈A
∆(e|ψ). (5.2)
Thus, after running any policyπ, we can efﬁciently compute a bound on the additional beneﬁt
that the optimal solution π∗ could obtain beyond the reward of π. We do that by computing the
conditional expected marginal beneﬁts for all elementse, and summing thek largest of them. Note
that these bounds can be computed on the ﬂy when running the greedy algorithm, in a similar
manner as discussed by Leskovec et al. (2007) for the non-adaptive setting.
5.2 The Min Cost Cover Objective
Another natural objective is to minimize the number of items selected while ensuring that a sufﬁcient
level of value is obtained. This leads to the Adaptive Stochastic Minimum Cost Coverage problem
described in§2, namely π∗∈ arg minπcavg(π) such thatf(E(π,φ ),φ )≥ Q for allφ. Recall that
440

ADAPTIVE SUBMODULARITY : T HEORY AND APPLICATIONS
cavg(π) is the expected cost of π, which in the unit cost case equals the expected number of items
selected by π, i.e., cavg(π) := E [|E(π, Φ)|]. If the objective is adaptive monotone submodular,
this is an adaptive version of the Minimum Submodular Cover problem (described on line (3.4) in
§3.1). Recall that the greedy algorithm is known to give a(ln(Q) + 1)-approximation for Minimum
Submodular Cover assuming the coverage function is integer-valued in addition to being monotone
submodular (Wolsey, 1982). Adaptive Stochastic Minimum Cost Coverage is also related to the
(Noisy) Interactive Submodular Set Cover problem studied by Guillory and Bilmes (2010, 2011),
which considers the worst-case setting (i.e., there is no distribution over states; instead states are
realized in an adversarial manner). Similar results for active learning have been proved by Kosaraju
et al. (1999) and Dasgupta (2004), as we discuss in more detail in§9.
We assume throughout this section that there exists a quality thresholdQ such thatf(E,φ ) =Q
for all φ, and for all S⊆ E and all φ, f(S,φ )≤ Q. Note that, as discussed in Section 3, if we
replace f(S,φ ) by a new function g(S,φ ) = min( f(S,φ ),Q′) for some constant Q′, g will be
adaptive submodular if f is. Thus, if f(E,φ ) varies across realizations, we can instead use the
greedy algorithm on the function truncated at some thresholdQ′≤ minφf(E,φ ) achievable by all
realizations.
In contrast to Adaptive Stochastic Maximization, for the coverage problem additional subtleties
arise. In particular, it is not enough that a policyπ achieves valueQ for the true realization; in order
forπ to terminate, it also requires a proof of this fact. Formally, we require thatπ coversf:
Deﬁnition 5.4 (Coverage). Letψ =ψ(π,φ ) be the partial realization encoding all states observed
during the execution ofπ under realizationφ. Given f : 2E×OE→ R, we say a policy π covers
φ with respect tof iff(dom(ψ),φ′) =f(E,φ′) for allφ′∼ψ. We say thatπ coversf if it covers
every realization with respect tof.
Coverage is deﬁned in such a way that upon terminating, π might not know which realization
is the true one, but has guaranteed that it has achieved the maximum reward in every possible case
(i.e., for every realization consistent with its observations). We obtain results for both the average
and worst-case cost objectives.
5.2.1 M INIMIZING THE AVERAGE COST
Before presenting our approximation guarantee for the Adaptive Stochastic Minimum Cost Cov-
erage, we introduce a special class of instances, called self–certifying instances. We make this
distinction because the greedy policy has stronger performance guarantees for self–certifying in-
stances, and such instances arise naturally in applications. For example, the Stochastic Submodular
Cover and Stochastic Set Cover instances in§7, the Adaptive Viral Marketing instances in§8, and
the Pool-Based Active Learning instances in§9 are all self–certifying.
Deﬁnition 5.5 (Self–Certifying Instances). An instance of Adaptive Stochastic Minimum Cost Cov-
erage is self–certifying if whenever a policy achieves the maximum possible value for the true
realization it immediately has a proof of this fact. Formally, an instance(f,p (φ)) is self–certifying
if for allφ,φ′, andψ such thatφ∼ψ andφ′∼ψ, we havef(dom(ψ),φ ) =f(E,φ ) if and only if
f(dom(ψ),φ′) =f(E,φ′).
One class of self–certifying instances which commonly arise are those in whichf(A,φ ) depends
only on the state of items in A, and in which there is a uniform maximum amount of reward that
can be obtained across realizations. Formally, we have the following observation.
441

GOLOVIN & KRAUSE
Proposition 5.6. Fix an instance (f,p (φ)). If there exists Q such thatf(E,φ ) = Q for allφ and
there exists some g : 2E×O→ R≥0 such that f(A,φ ) = g ({(e,φ (e)) :e∈A}) for all A andφ,
then (f,p (φ)) is self–certifying.
Proof. Fixφ,φ′, andψ such thatφ∼ψ andφ′∼ψ. Assuming the existence ofg and treatingψ as a
relation, we havef(dom(ψ),φ ) = g(ψ) = f(dom(ψ),φ′). Hence f(dom(ψ),φ ) = Q =f(E,φ )
if and only iff(dom(ψ),φ′) =Q =f(E,φ′).
For our results on minimum cost coverage, we also need a stronger monotonicity condition:
Deﬁnition 5.7 (Strong Adaptive Monotonicity). A functionf : 2E×OE→ R is strongly adaptive
monotone with respect top (φ) if, informally “selecting more items never hurts” with respect to the
expected reward. Formally, for allψ, alle /∈ dom(ψ), and all possible outcomes o∈ O such that
P [Φ(e) =o | Φ∼ψ]> 0, we require
E [f(dom(ψ), Φ) | Φ∼ψ]≤ E [f(dom(ψ)∪{e}, Φ) | Φ∼ψ, Φ(e) =o] . (5.3)
Strong adaptive monotonicity implies adaptive monotonicity, as the latter means that “selecting
more items never hurts in expectation,” i.e.,
E [f(dom(ψ), Φ) | Φ∼ψ]≤ E [f(dom(ψ)∪{e}, Φ) | Φ∼ψ].
We now state our main result for the average case costcavg(π):
Theorem 5.8. Supposef : 2E×OE→ R≥0 is adaptive submodular and strongly adaptive mono-
tone with respect to p (φ) and there existsQ such thatf(E,φ ) = Q for all φ. Let η be any value
such thatf(S,φ )> Q−η impliesf(S,φ ) = Q for allS andφ. Let δ = minφp (φ) be the mini-
mum probability of any realization. Letπ∗
avg be an optimal policy minimizing the expected number of
items selected to guarantee every realization is covered. Let π be anα-approximate greedy policy.
Then in general
cavg(π)≤αc avg(π∗
avg)
(
ln
(Q
δη
)
+ 1
)
and for self–certifying instances
cavg(π)≤αc avg(π∗
avg)
(
ln
(Q
η
)
+ 1
)
.
Note that if range(f)⊂ Z, then η = 1 is a valid choice, and then for general and self–certifying
instances we have cavg(π)≤ αc avg(π∗
avg) (ln(Q/δ) + 1) andcavg(π)≤ αc avg(π∗
avg) (ln(Q) + 1),
respectively.
5.2.2 M INIMIZING THE WORST-CASE COST
For the worst-case cost cwc(π) := max φ|E(π,φ )|, strong adaptive monotonicity is not required;
adaptive monotonicity sufﬁces. We obtain the following result.
Theorem 5.9. Supposef : 2E×OE→ R≥0 is adaptive monotone and adaptive submodular with
respect top (φ), and letη be any value such thatf(S,φ )>f (E,φ )−η impliesf(S,φ ) =f(E,φ )
for all S and φ. Let δ = minφp (φ) be the minimum probability of any realization. Let π∗
wc be
442

ADAPTIVE SUBMODULARITY : T HEORY AND APPLICATIONS
the optimal policy minimizing the worst-case number of queries to guarantee every realization is
covered. Let π be anα-approximate greedy policy. Finally, letQ := E [f(E,φ )] be the maximum
possible expected reward. Then
cwc(π)≤αc wc(π∗
wc)
(
ln
(Q
δη
)
+ 1
)
.
The proofs of Theorems 5.8 and 5.9 are given in Appendix A.4.
Thus, even though adaptive submodularity is deﬁned w.r.t. a particular distribution, perhaps
surprisingly, the adaptive greedy algorithm is competitive even in the case of adversarially chosen
realizations, against a policy optimized to minimize the worst-case cost. Theorem 5.9 therefore
suggests that if we do not have a strong prior, we can obtain the strongest guarantees if we choose
a distribution that is “as uniform as possible” (i.e., maximizes δ) while still guaranteeing adaptive
submodularity.
5.2.3 D ISCUSSION
Note that the approximation factor for self–certifying instances in Theorem 5.8 reduces to the
(ln(Q) + 1)-approximation guarantee for the greedy algorithm for Set Cover instances with Q
elements, in the case of a deterministic distribution p (φ). Moreover, with a deterministic dis-
tribution p (φ) there is no distinction between average-case and worst-case cost. Hence, an im-
mediate corollary of the result of Feige (1998) mentioned in §3 is that for every constant ϵ > 0
there is no polynomial time (1−ϵ) ln (Q/η) approximation algorithm for self–certifying instances
of Adaptive Stochastic Min Cost Cover, under either the cavg(·) or the cwc(·) objective, unless
NP ⊆ DTIME(nO(log logn)). It remains open to determine whether or not Adaptive Stochastic
Min Cost Cover with the worst-case cost objective admits a ln (Q/η) + 1 approximation for self–
certifying instances via a polynomial time algorithm, and in particular whether the greedy pol-
icy has such an approximation guarantee. However, in Lemma A.14 we show that Feige’s result
also implies there is no (1−ϵ) ln (Q/δη) polynomial time approximation algorithm for general
(non self-certifying) instances of Adaptive Stochastic Min Cost Cover under either objective, unless
NP⊆ DTIME(nO(log logn)). In that sense, each of the three results comprising Theorem 5.8 and
Theorem 5.9 are best-possible under reasonable complexity-theoretic assumptions. As we show
in Section 9, our result for the average-case cost of greedy policies for self–certifying instances
also matches (up to constant factors) results on hardness of approximating the optimal policy in the
special case of active learning, also known as the Optimal Decision Tree problem.
5.3 The Min-Sum Cover Objective
Yet another natural objective is the min-sum objective, in which an unrealized reward ofx incurs a
cost ofx in each time step, and the goal is to minimize the total cost incurred.
5.3.1 B ACKGROUND ON THE NON-ADAPTIVE MIN-SUM COVER PROBLEM
In the non-adaptive setting, perhaps the simplest form of a coverage problem with this objective is
the Min-Sum Set Cover problem (Feige, Lov´asz, & Tetali, 2004) in which the input is a set system
(U,S), the output is a permutation of the sets⟨S1,S 2,...,S m⟩, and the goal is to minimize the sum
of element coverage times, where the coverage time of u is the index of the ﬁrst set that contains
it (e.g., it is j if u∈ Sj and u /∈ Si for all i < j). In this problem and its generalizations the
443

GOLOVIN & KRAUSE
min-sum objective is useful in modeling processing costs in certain applications, for example in
ordering diagnostic tests to identify a disease cheaply (Kaplan, Kushilevitz, & Mansour, 2005),
in ordering multiple ﬁlters to be applied to database records while processing a query (Munagala,
Babu, Motwani, Widom, & Thomas, 2005), or in ordering multiple heuristics to run on boolean
satisﬁability instances as a means to solve them faster in practice (Streeter & Golovin, 2008). A
particularly expressive generalization of min-sum set cover has been studied under the names Min-
Sum Submodular Cover(Streeter & Golovin, 2008) andL1-Submodular Set Cover(Golovin, Gupta,
Kumar, & Tangwongsan, 2008). The former paper extends the greedy algorithm to a natural online
variant of the problem, while the latter studies a parameterized family ofLp-Submodular Set Cover
problems in which the objective is analogous to minimizing the Lp norm of the coverage times for
Min-Sum Set Cover instances. In the Min-Sum Submodular Cover problem, there is a monotone
submodular function f : 2E→ R≥0 deﬁning the reward obtained from a collection of elements 5.
There is an integral cost c(e) for each element, and the output is a sequence of all of the elements
σ =⟨e1,e 2,...,e n⟩. For each t∈ R≥0, we deﬁne the set of elements in the sequence σ within a
budget oft:
σ[t] :=


ei :
∑
j≤i
c(ej)≤t


.
The cost we wish to minimize is then
cΣ(σ) :=
∞∑
t=0
(
f(E)−f(σ[t])
)
. (5.4)
Feige et al. (2004) proved that for Min-Sum Set cover, the greedy algorithm achieves a4-approximation
to the minimum cost, and also that this is optimal in the sense that no polynomial time algorithm
can achieve a (4−ϵ)-approximation, for anyϵ> 0, unless P = NP. Interestingly, the greedy algo-
rithm also achieves a 4-approximation for the more general Min-Sum Submodular Cover problem
as well (Streeter & Golovin, 2008; Golovin et al., 2008).
5.3.2 T HE ADAPTIVE STOCHASTIC MIN-SUM COVER PROBLEM
In this article, we extend the result of Streeter and Golovin (2008) and Golovin et al. (2008) to an
adaptive version of Min-Sum Submodular Cover. For clarity’s sake we will consider the unit-cost
case here (i.e.,c(e) = 1 for alle); we show how to extend adaptive submodularity to handle general
costs in the Appendix. In the adaptive version of the problem, π[t] plays the role of σ[t], and favg
plays the role off. The goal is to ﬁnd a policy π minimizing
cΣ(π) :=
∞∑
t=0
(
E [f(E, Φ)]−favg(π[t])
)
=
∑
φ
p (φ)
∞∑
t=0
(
f(E,φ )−f(E(π[t],φ ),φ )
)
. (5.5)
We call this problem theAdaptive Stochastic Min-Sum Cover problem. The key difference between
this objective and the minimum cost cover objective is that here, the cost at each step is only the
fractional extent that we have not covered the true realization, whereas in the minimum cost cover
objective we are charged in full in each step until we have completely covered the true realization
5. To encode Min-Sum Set Cover instance (U,S), letE :=S andf (A) :=|∪ e∈Ae|, where eache∈E is a subset of
elements inU.
444

ADAPTIVE SUBMODULARITY : T HEORY AND APPLICATIONS
(according to Deﬁnition 5.4). We prove the following result for the Adaptive Stochastic Min-Sum
Cover problem with arbitrary item costs in Appendix A.5.
Theorem 5.10. Fix anyα≥ 1. Iff is adaptive monotone and adaptive submodular with respect to
the distributionp (φ),π is anα-approximate greedy policy with respect to the item costs, andπ∗ is
any policy, thencΣ(π)≤ 4αc Σ(π∗).
6. Application: Stochastic Submodular Maximization
As our ﬁrst application, consider the sensor placement problem introduced in §1. Suppose we
would like to monitor a spatial phenomenon such as temperature in a building. We discretize the
environment into a setE of locations. We would like to pick a subset A⊆E ofk locations that is
most “informative”, where we use a set function ˆf(A) to quantify the informativeness of placement
A. Krause and Guestrin (2007) show that many natural objective functions (such as reduction
in predictive uncertainty measured in terms of Shannon entropy with conditionally independent
observations) are monotone submodular.
Now consider the problem, where the informativeness of a sensor is unknown before deploy-
ment (e.g., when deploying cameras for surveillance, the location of objects and their associated
occlusions may not be known in advance, or varying amounts of noise may reduce the sensing
range). We can model this extension by assigning a state φ(e)∈ O to each possible location, in-
dicating the extent to which a sensor placed at location e is working. To quantify the value of a
set of sensor deployments under a realization φ indicating to what extent the various sensors are
working, we ﬁrst deﬁne (e,o ) for each e∈ E and o∈ O, which represents the placement of a
sensor at location e which is in state o. We then suppose there is a function ˆf : 2E×O → R≥0
which quantiﬁes the informativeness of a set of sensor deployments in arbitrary states. (Note ˆf is a
set function taking a set of (sensor deployment, state) pairs as input.) The utilityf(A,φ ) of placing
sensors at the locations inA under realizationφ is then
f(A,φ ) := ˆf({(e,φ (e)) :e∈A}).
We aim to adaptively place k sensors to maximize our expected utility. We assume that sensor
failures at each location are independent of each other, i.e., P [Φ =φ] = ∏
e∈E P [Φ(e) =φ(e)],
where P [φ(e) =o] is the probability that a sensor placed at location e will be in stateo. Asadpour
et al. (2008) studied a special case of our problem, in which sensors either fail completely (in which
case they contribute no value at all) or work perfectly, under the nameStochastic Submodular Max-
imization. They proved that the adaptive greedy algorithm obtains a (1− 1/e) approximation to
the optimal adaptive policy, provided ˆf is monotone submodular. We extend their result to multiple
types of failures by showing that f(A,φ ) is adaptive submodular with respect to distribution p (φ)
and then invoking Theorem 5.2. Fig. 2 illustrates an instance of Stochastic Submodular Maximiza-
tion wheref(A,φ ) is the cardinality of union of sets index byA and parameterized byφ.
Theorem 6.1. Fix a prior such that P [Φ =φ] = ∏
e∈E P [Φ(e) =φ(e)] and an integerk, and let
the objective function ˆf : 2E×O→ R≥0 be monotone submodular. Let π be any α-approximate
greedy policy attempting to maximizef, and letπ∗ be any policy. Then for all positive integers𝓁,
favg(π[𝓁])≥
(
1−e−𝓁/αk
)
favg(π∗
[k]).
In particular, ifπ is the greedy policy (i.e.,α = 1) and𝓁 =k, thenfavg(π[k])≥
(
1− 1
e
)
favg(π∗
[k]).
445

GOLOVIN & KRAUSE
Proof. We prove Theorem 6.1 by ﬁrst provingf is adaptive monotone and adaptive submodular in
this model, and then applying Theorem 5.2. Adaptive monotonicity is readily proved after observing
thatf(·,φ ) is monotone for each φ. Moving on to adaptive submodularity, ﬁx any ψ,ψ′ such that
ψ⊆ ψ′ and any e /∈ dom(ψ′). We aim to show ∆(e|ψ′)≤ ∆(e|ψ). Intuitively, this is clear,
as ∆(e|ψ′) is the expected marginal beneﬁt of adding e to a larger base set than is the case with
∆(e|ψ), namely dom(ψ′) as compared to dom(ψ), and the realizations are independent. To prove
it rigorously, we deﬁne a coupled distribution µ over pairs of realizationsφ∼ψ andφ′∼ψ′ such
thatφ(e′) = φ′(e′) for all e′ /∈ dom(ψ′). Formally, µ(φ,φ′) = ∏
e∈E\dom(ψ) P [Φ(e) =φ(e)] if
φ∼ ψ, φ′∼ ψ′, and φ(e′) = φ′(e′) for all e′ /∈ dom(ψ′); otherwise µ(φ,φ′) = 0 . (Note that
µ(φ,φ′) > 0 implies φ(e′) = φ′(e′) for all e′ ∈ dom(ψ) as well, since φ∼ ψ, φ′ ∼ ψ′, and
ψ⊆ ψ′.) Also note that p (φ|ψ) = ∑
φ′µ(φ,φ′) and p (φ′|ψ′) = ∑
φµ(φ,φ′). Calculating
∆(e|ψ′) and ∆(e|ψ) usingµ, we see that for any (φ,φ′) in the support ofµ,
f(dom(ψ′)∪{e},φ′)−f(dom(ψ′),φ′) = ˆf(ψ′∪
{
(e,φ′(e))
}
)− ˆf(ψ′))
≤ ˆf(ψ∪{ (e,φ (e))})− ˆf(ψ))
= f(dom(ψ)∪{e},φ )−f(dom(ψ),φ )
from the submodularity of ˆf. Hence
∆(e|ψ′) = ∑
(φ,φ′)µ(φ,φ′) (f(dom(ψ′)∪{e},φ′)−f(dom(ψ′),φ′))
≤ ∑
(φ,φ′)µ(φ,φ′) (f(dom(ψ)∪{e},φ )−f(dom(ψ),φ )) = ∆( e|ψ)
which completes the proof.
7. Application: Stochastic Submodular Coverage
Suppose that instead of wishing to adaptively place k unreliable sensors to maximize the utility of
the information obtained, as discussed in§6, we have a quota on utility and wish to adaptively place
the minimum number of unreliable sensors to achieve this quota. This amounts to a minimum-cost
coverage version of the Stochastic Submodular Maximization problem introduced in§6, which we
call Stochastic Submodular Coverage.
As in §6, in the Stochastic Submodular Coverage problem we suppose there is a function
ˆf : 2E×O → R≥0 which quantiﬁes the utility of a set of sensors in arbitrary states. Also, the
states of each sensor are independent, so that P [Φ =φ] = ∏
e∈E P [Φ(e) =φ(e)]. The goal is
to obtain a quota Q of utility at minimum cost. Thus, we deﬁne our objective as f(A,φ ) :=
min
{
Q, ˆf({(e,φ (e)) :e∈A})
}
, and want to ﬁnd a policy π covering every realization and min-
imizingcavg(π) := E [|E(π, Φ)|]. We additionally assume that this quota can always be obtained
using sufﬁciently many sensor placements; formally, this amounts to f(E,φ ) = Q for all φ. We
obtain the following result, whose proof we defer until the end of this section.
Theorem 7.1. Fix a prior with independent sensor states so thatP [Φ =φ] =∏
e∈E P [Φ(e) =φ(e)],
and let ˆf : 2E×O→ R≥0 be a monotone submodular function. Fix Q∈ R≥0 such thatf(A,φ ) :=
min
(
Q, ˆf({(e,φ (e)) :e∈A})
)
satisﬁes f(E,φ ) = Q for all φ. Let η be any value such that
f(S,φ )> Q−η impliesf(S,φ ) = Q for allS andφ. Finally, let π be anα-approximate greedy
446

ADAPTIVE SUBMODULARITY : T HEORY AND APPLICATIONS
Figure 2: Illustration of part of a Stochastic Set Cover instance. Shown are the supports of two
distributions over sets, indexed by itemse (marked in blue) ande′ (yellow).
policy for maximizingf, and letπ∗ be any policy. Then
cavg(π)≤αc avg(π∗)
(
ln
(Q
η
)
+ 1
)
.
7.1 A Special Case: The Stochastic Set Coverage Problem
The Stochastic Submodular Coverage problem is a generalization of the Stochastic Set Coverage
problem (Goemans & V ondr´ak, 2006). In Stochastic Set Coverage the underlying submodular ob-
jective ˆf is the number of elements covered in some input set system. In other words, there is a
ground set U ofn elements to be covered, and items E such that each item e is associated with a
distribution over subsets of U. When an item is selected, a set is sampled from its distribution, as
illustrated in Fig. 2. The problem is to adaptively select items until all elements of U are covered
by sampled sets, while minimizing the expected number of items selected. Like us, Goemans and
V ondr´ak also assume that the subsets are sampled independently for each item, and every element
ofU can be covered in every realization, so thatf(E,φ ) =|U| for allφ.
Goemans and V ondr´ak primarily investigated the adaptivity gap (quantifying how much adaptive
policies can outperform non-adaptive policies) of Stochastic Set Coverage, for variants in which
items can be repeatedly selected or not, and prove adaptivity gaps of Θ(logn) in the former case,
and between Ω(n) andO(n2) in the latter. They also provide ann-approximation algorithm. More
recently, Liu et al. (2008) considered a special case of Stochastic Set Coverage in which each item
may be in one of two states. They were motivated by a streaming database problem, in which
a collection of queries sharing common ﬁlters must all be evaluated on a stream element. They
transform the problem to a Stochastic Set Coverage instance in which (ﬁlter, query) pairs are to be
covered by ﬁlter evaluations; which pairs are covered by a ﬁlter depends on the (binary) outcome
of evaluating it on the stream element. The resulting instances satisfy the assumption that every
element ofU can be covered in every realization. They study, among other algorithms, the adaptive
greedy algorithm specialized to this setting, and show that if the subsets are sampled independently
for each item, so thatP [Φ =φ] =∏
e P [Φ(e) =φ(e)], then it is anHn :=∑n
x=1
1
x approximation.
(Recall ln(n)≤H n≤ ln(n) + 1 for all n≥ 1.) Moreover, Liu et al. report that it empirically
outperforms a number of other algorithms in their experiments.
447

GOLOVIN & KRAUSE
The adaptive submodularity framework allows us to recover Liu et al.’s result, and generalize
it to richer item distributions over subsets of U, all as a corollary of Theorem 7.1. Speciﬁcally, we
obtain a (ln(n)+1)-approximation for the Stochastic Set Coverage problem, wheren :=|U|, which
matches the approximation ratio for the greedy algorithm for classical Set Cover that Stochastic Set
Coverage generalizes. Like Liu et al.’s result, our result is tight if NP ⊈ DTIME(nO(log logn)),
since it matches Feige’s lower bound of(1−ε) lnn for the approximability of Set Cover under that
assumption (Feige, 1998).
We model the Stochastic Set Coverage problem by letting φ(e) ⊆ U indicate the random
set sampled from e’s distribution. Since the sampled sets are independent we have P [Φ =φ] =∏
e P [Φ(e) =φ(e)]. For any A⊆ E letf(A,φ ) :=|∪e∈Aφ(e)| be the number of elements of U
covered by the sets sampled from items inA. As in the previous work mentioned above, we assume
f(E,φ ) = n for allφ. Therefore we may set Q = n. Since the range of f includes only integers,
we may setη = 1. Applying Theorem 7.1 then yields the following result.
Corollary 7.2. The adaptive greedy algorithm achieves a(ln(n) + 1)-approximation for Stochastic
Set Coverage, wheren :=|U| is the size of the ground set.
We now provide the proof of Theorem 7.1.
Proof of Theorem 7.1: We will ultimately prove Theorem 7.1 by applying the bound from The-
orem 5.8 for self–certifying instances. The proof mostly consists of justifying this ﬁnal step.
Without loss of generality we may assume ˆf is truncated at Q, otherwise we may use ˆg(S) =
min
{
Q, ˆf(S)
}
in lieu of ˆf. This removes the need to truncatef. Since we established the adaptive
submodularity off in the proof of Theorem 6.1, and by assumptionf(E,φ ) =Q for allφ, to apply
Theorem 5.8 we need only show thatf is strongly adaptive monotone, and that the instances under
consideration are self–certifying.
We begin by showing the strong adaptive monotonicity off. Fix a partial realizationψ, an item
e /∈ dom(ψ) and a stateo. Letψ′ =ψ∪{ (e,o )}. Then treatingψ andψ′ as subsets ofE×O, and
using the monotonicity of ˆf, we obtain
E [f(dom(ψ), Φ)| Φ∼ψ] = ˆf(ψ)≤ ˆf(ψ′)≤ E
[
f(dom(ψ′), Φ)| Φ∼ψ′]
,
which is equivalent to the strong adaptive monotonicity condition.
Next we prove that these instances are self–certifying. Consider anyψ andφ,φ′ consistent with
ψ. Then
f(dom(ψ),φ ) = ˆf(ψ) =f(dom(ψ),φ′).
Since f(E,φ ) = f(E,φ′) = Q by assumption, it follows that f(dom(ψ),φ ) = f(E,φ ) iff
f(dom(ψ),φ′) =f(E,φ′), so the instance is self–certifying.
We have shown thatf andp (φ) satisfy the assumptions of Theorem 5.8 on this self–certifying
instance. Hence we may apply it to obtain the claimed approximation guarantee.
8. Application: Adaptive Viral Marketing
For our next application, consider the following scenario. Suppose we would like to generate de-
mand for a genuinely novel product. Potential customers do not realize how valuable the new
product will be to them, and conventional advertisements are failing to convince them to try it. In
448

ADAPTIVE SUBMODULARITY : T HEORY AND APPLICATIONS
Figure 3: Illustration of the Adaptive Viral Marketing problem. Left: the underlying social network.
Middle: the people inﬂuenced and the observations obtained after one person is selected.
this case, we may try to spur demand by offering a special promotional deal to a select few people,
and hope that demand builds virally, propagating through the social network as people recommend
the product to their friends and associates. Supposing we know something about the structure of
the social networks people inhabit, and how ideas, innovation, and new product adoption diffuse
through them, this begs the question: to which initial set of people should we offer the promotional
deal, in order to spur maximum demand for our product?
This, broadly, is the viral marketing problem. The same problem arises in the context of spread-
ing technological, cultural, and intellectual innovations, broadly construed. In the interest of uniﬁed
terminology we follow Kempe et al. (2003) and talk of spreading inﬂuence through the social net-
work, where we say people are active if they have adopted the idea or innovation in question, and
inactive otherwise, and thata inﬂuencesb ifa convincesb to adopt the idea or innovation in question.
There are many ways to model the diffusion dynamics governing the spread of inﬂuence in
a social network. We consider a basic and well-studied model, the independent cascade model ,
described in detail below. For this model Kempe et al. (2003) obtain a very interesting result; they
show that the eventual spread of the inﬂuencef (i.e., the ultimate number of customers that demand
the product) is a monotone submodular function of the seed setS of people initially selected. This,
in conjunction with the results of Nemhauser et al. (1978) implies that the greedy algorithm obtains
at least
(
1− 1
e
)
of the value of the best feasible seed set of size at mostk, i.e., arg maxS:|S|≤kf(S),
where we interpret k as the budget for the promotional campaign. Though Kempe et al. consider
only the maximum coverage version of the viral marketing problem, their result in conjunction with
that of Wolsey (1982) also implies that the greedy algorithm will obtain a quotaQ of value at a cost
of at most ln(Q) + 1 times the cost of the optimal set arg minS{c(S) :f(S)≥Q} iff takes on
only integral values.
8.1 Adaptive Viral Marketing
The viral marketing problem has a very natural adaptive analog. Instead of selecting a ﬁxed set of
people in advance, we may select a person to offer the promotion to, make some observations about
449

GOLOVIN & KRAUSE
the resulting spread of demand for our product, and repeat. See Fig. 3 for an illustration. In§8.2, we
use the idea of adaptive submodularity to obtain results analogous to those of Kempe et al. (2003)
in the adaptive setting. Speciﬁcally, we show that the greedy policy obtains at least
(
1− 1
e
)
of the
value of the best policy. Moreover, we extend this result by achieving that guarantee not only for
the case where our reward is simply the number of inﬂuenced people, but also for any (nonnegative)
monotone submodular function of the set of people inﬂuenced. In §8.3 we consider the minimum
cost cover objective, and show that the greedy policy obtains a logarithmic approximation for it. To
our knowledge, no approximation results for this adaptive variant of the viral marketing problem
have been known.
8.1.1 I NDEPENDENT CASCADE MODEL
In this model, the social network is a directed graph G = (V,A ) where each vertex in V is a
person, and each edge (u,v )∈ A has an associated binary random variable Xuv indicating if u
will inﬂuence v. That is, Xuv = 1 ifu will inﬂuence v once it has been inﬂuenced, and Xuv = 0
otherwise. The random variablesXuv are independent, and have known meanspuv := E [Xuv]. We
will call an edge (u,v ) withXuv = 1 a live edge and an edge with Xuv = 0 a dead edge. When a
nodeu is activated, the edgesXuv to each neighborv ofu are sampled, andv is activated if (u,v )
is live. Inﬂuence can then spread from u’s neighbors to their neighbors, and so on, according to
the same process. Once active, nodes remain active throughout the process, however Kempe et al.
(2003) show that this assumption is without loss of generality, and can be removed.
8.1.2 T HE FEEDBACK MODEL
In the Adaptive Viral Marketing problem under the independent cascades model, the items corre-
spond to people we can activate by offering them the promotional deal. How we deﬁne the states
φ(u) depends on what information we obtain as a result of activating u. Given the nature of the
diffusion process, activating u can have wide-ranging effects, so the state φ(u) has more to do
with the state of the social network on the whole than with u in particular. Speciﬁcally, we model
φ(u) as a function φu : A→ {0, 1, ?}, where φu((u,v )) = 0 means that activating u has re-
vealed that (u,v ) is dead, φu((u,v )) = 1 means that activating u has revealed that (u,v ) is live,
andφu((u,v )) = ? means that activating u has not revealed the status of (u,v ) (i.e., the value of
Xuv). We require each realization to be consistent and complete. Consistency means that no edge
should be declared both live and dead by any two states. That is, for all u,v ∈ V and a∈ A,
(φu(a),φv(a)) /∈{ (0, 1), (1, 0)}. Completeness means that the status of each edge is revealed by
some activation. That is, for all a∈ A there existsu∈ V such thatφu(a)∈{ 0, 1}. A consistent
and complete realization thus encodesXuv for each edge (u,v ). Let A(φ) denote the live edges as
encoded by φ. There are several candidates for which edge sets we are allowed to observe when
activating a nodeu. Here we consider what we call the Full-Adoption Feedback Model: After acti-
vatingu we get to see the status (live or dead) of all edges exitingv, for all nodesv reachable from
u via live edges (i.e., reachable from u in (V,A (φ)), where φ is the true realization. We illustrate
the full-adoption feedback model in Fig. 3.
8.1.3 T HE OBJECTIVE FUNCTION
In the simplest case, the reward for inﬂuencing a setU⊆V of nodes is ˆf(U) :=|U|. Kempe et al.
(2003) obtain an
(
1− 1
e
)
-approximation for the slightly more general case in which each node u
450

ADAPTIVE SUBMODULARITY : T HEORY AND APPLICATIONS
has a weight wu indicating its importance, and the reward is ˆf(U) := ∑
u∈Uwu. We generalize
this result further, to include arbitrary nonnegative monotone submodular reward functions ˆf. This
allows us, for example, to encode a value associated with the diversity of the set of nodes inﬂu-
enced, such as the notion that it is better to achieve20% market penetration in ﬁve different (equally
important) demographic segments than 100% market penetration in one and 0% in the others.
8.2 Guarantees for the Maximum Coverage Objective
We are now ready to formally state our result for the maximum coverage objective.
Theorem 8.1. The greedy policy πgreedy obtains at least
(
1− 1
e
)
of the value of the best policy
for the Adaptive Viral Marketing problem with arbitrary monotone submodular reward functions,
in the independent cascade and full-adoption feedback models discussed above. That is, if σ(S,φ )
is the set of all activated nodes when S is the seed set of activated nodes and φ is the realization,
ˆf : 2V→ R≥0 is an arbitrary monotone submodular function indicating the reward for inﬂuencing
a set, and the objective function is f(S,φ ) := ˆf(σ(S,φ )), then for all policiesπ and allk∈ N we
have
favg(πgreedy
[k] )≥
(
1− 1
e
)
favg(π[k]).
More generally, ifπ is anα-approximate greedy policy then∀𝓁∈ N,favg(π[𝓁])≥
(
1−e−𝓁/αk)
favg(π∗
[k]).
Proof. Adaptive monotonicity follows immediately from the fact thatf(·,φ ) is monotonic for each
φ. It thus sufﬁces to prove thatf is adaptive submodular with respect to the probability distribution
on realizationsp (φ), because then we can invoke Theorem 5.2 to complete the proof.
We will say we have observed an edge (u,v ) if we know its status, i.e., if it is live or dead.
Fix any ψ,ψ′ such that ψ ⊆ ψ′ and any v /∈ dom(ψ′). We must show ∆(v|ψ′)≤ ∆(v|ψ).
To prove this rigorously, we deﬁne a coupled distribution µ over pairs of realizations φ∼ ψ and
φ′∼ ψ′. Note that given the feedback model, the realization φ is a function of the random vari-
ables{Xuw : (u,w )∈A} indicating the status of each edge. For conciseness we use the notation
X ={Xuw : (u,w )∈A}. We deﬁne µ implicitly in terms of a joint distribution ˆµ on X× X′,
whereφ = φ(X) andφ′ = φ′(X′) are the realizations induced by the two distinct sets of random
edge statuses, respectively. Hence µ(φ(X),φ (X′)) = ˆµ(X, X′). Next, let us say a partial realiza-
tionψ observes an edge e if some w∈ dom(ψ) has revealed its status as being live or dead. For
edges (u,w ) observed byψ, the random variableXuw is deterministically set to the status observed
byψ. Similarly, for edges (u,w ) observed byψ′, the random variableX′
uw is deterministically set
to the status observed by ψ′. Note that since ψ⊆ ψ′, the state of all edges which are observed by
ψ are the same inφ andφ′. All (X, X′)∈ support(ˆµ) have these properties. Additionally, we will
construct ˆµ so that the status of all edges which are unobserved by bothψ′ andψ are the same in X
and X′, meaningXuw =X′
uw for all such edges (u,w ), or else ˆµ(X, X′) = 0.
The above constraints leave us with the following degrees of freedom: we may select Xuw for
all (u,w )∈A which are unobserved byψ. We select them independently, such thatE [Xuw] =puw
as with the priorp (φ). Hence for all (X, X′) satisfying the above constraints,
ˆµ(X, X′) =
∏
(u,w) unobserved byψ
pXuw
uw (1−puw)1−Xuw,
451

GOLOVIN & KRAUSE
and otherwise ˆµ(X, X′) = 0 . Note that p (φ|ψ) = ∑
φ′µ(φ,φ′) andp (φ′|ψ′) = ∑
φµ(φ,φ′).
We next claim that for all (φ,φ′)∈ support(µ)
f(dom(ψ′)∪{v},φ′)−f(dom(ψ′),φ′) ≤ f(dom(ψ)∪{v},φ )−f(dom(ψ),φ ). (8.1)
Recallf(S,φ ) := ˆf(σ(S,φ )), whereσ(S,φ ) is the set of all activated nodes whenS is the seed set
of activated nodes andφ is the realization. Let B =σ(dom(ψ),φ ) andC =σ(dom(ψ)∪{v},φ )
denote the active nodes before and after selectingv after dom(ψ) under realizationsφ, and similarly
deﬁne B′ andC′ with respect to ψ′ andφ′. Let D := C\B, D′ := C′\B′. Then Eq. (8.1) is
equivalent to ˆf(B′∪D′)− ˆf(B′)≤ ˆf(B∪D)− ˆf(B). By the submodularity of ˆf, it sufﬁces to
show thatB⊆B′ andD′⊆D to prove the above inequality, which we will now do.
We start by proving B⊆ B′. Fix w∈ B. Then there exists a path from some u∈ dom(ψ)
tow in (V,A (φ)). Moreover, every edge in this path is not only live but also observed to be live,
by deﬁnition of the feedback model. Since (φ,φ′)∈ support(µ), this implies that every edge in
this path is also live under φ′, as edges observed by ψ must have the same status under both φ and
φ′. It follows that there is a path from u tow in (V,A (φ′)). Since u is clearly also in dom(ψ′), we
concludew∈B′, henceB⊆B′.
Next we show D′⊆ D. Fix some w∈ D′ and suppose by way of contradiction that w /∈ D.
Hence there exists a path P fromv tow in (V,A (φ′)) but no such path exists in (V,A (φ)). The
edges ofP are all live underφ′, and at least one must be dead underφ. Let (u,u′) be such an edge
in P . Because the status of this edge differs in φ and φ′, and (φ,φ′)∈ support(µ), it must be
that (u,u′) is observed byψ′ but not observed byψ. Because it is observed by ψ′, in our feedback
model it must be that u is active after dom(ψ′) is selected, i.e.,u∈B′. However, this implies that
all nodes reachable from u via edges in P are also active after dom(ψ′) is selected, since all the
edges inP are live. Hence all such nodes, includingw, are inB′. SinceD′ andB′ are disjoint, this
impliesw /∈D′, a contradiction.
Having proved Eq. (8.1), we now proceed to use it to show ∆(v|ψ′)≤ ∆(v|ψ) as in§6.
∆(v|ψ′) = ∑
(φ,φ′)µ(φ,φ′) (f(dom(ψ′)∪{v},φ′)−f(dom(ψ′),φ′))
≤ ∑
(φ,φ′)µ(φ,φ′) (f(dom(ψ)∪{v},φ )−f(dom(ψ),φ )) = ∆( v|ψ)
which completes the proof.
8.2.1 C OMPARISON WITH STOCHASTIC SUBMODULAR MAXIMIZATION
It is worth contrasting the Adaptive Viral Marketing problem with the Stochastic Submodular Max-
imization problem of §6. In the latter problem, we can think of the items as being random in-
dependently distributed sets. In Adaptive Viral Marketing by contrast, the random sets (of nodes
inﬂuenced when a ﬁxed node is selected) depend on the random status of the edges, and hence may
be correlated through them. Nevertheless, we can obtain the same
(
1− 1
e
)
approximation factor for
both problems.
8.3 The Minimum Cost Cover Objective
We may also wish to adaptively run our campaign until a certain level of market penetration has
been achieved, e.g., a certain number of people have adopted the product. We can formalize this
452

ADAPTIVE SUBMODULARITY : T HEORY AND APPLICATIONS
goal using the minimum cost cover objective. For this objective, we have an instance of Adaptive
Stochastic Minimum Cost Cover, in which we are given a quotaQ≤ ˆf(V ) (quantifying the desired
level of market penetration) and we must adaptively select nodes to activate until the set of all active
nodesS satisﬁes ˆf(S)≥Q. We obtain the following result.
Theorem 8.2. Fix a monotone submodular function ˆf : 2V→ R≥0 indicating the reward for inﬂu-
encing a set, and a quota Q≤ ˆf(V ). Suppose the objective is f(S,φ ) := min
{
Q, ˆf(σ(S,φ ))
}
,
where σ(S,φ ) is the set of all activated nodes when S is the seed set of activated nodes and
φ is the realization. Let η be any value such that ˆf(S) > Q− η implies ˆf(S) ≥ Q for all
S. Then any α-approximate greedy policy π on average costs at most α
(
ln
(
Q
η
)
+ 1
)
times
the average cost of the best policy obtaining Q reward for the Adaptive Viral Marketing prob-
lem in the independent cascade model with full-adoption feedback as described above. That is,
cavg(π)≤α
(
ln
(
Q
η
)
+ 1
)
cavg(π∗) for anyπ∗ that covers every realization.
Proof. We prove Theorem 8.2 by recourse to Theorem 5.8. We have already established that f is
adaptive submodular, in the proof of Theorem 8.1. It remains to show that f is strongly adaptive
monotone, that these instances are self–certifying, and that Q andη equal the corresponding terms
in the statement of Theorem 5.8.
We start with strong adaptive monotonicity. Fixψ,e /∈ dom(ψ), ando∈O. We must show
E [f(dom(ψ), Φ) | Φ∼ψ]≤ E [f(dom(ψ)∪{e}, Φ) | Φ∼ψ, Φ(e) =o]. (8.2)
Let V +(ψ) denote the active nodes after selecting dom(ψ) and observing ψ. By deﬁnition of
the full adoption feedback model, V +(ψ) consists of precisely those nodes v for which there ex-
ists a path Puv from some u∈ dom(ψ) to v via exclusively live edges. The edges whose sta-
tus we observe consist of all edges exiting nodes in V +(ψ). It follows that every path from any
u ∈ V +(ψ) to any v ∈ V \V +(ψ) contains at least one edge which is observed by ψ to be
dead. Hence, in every φ∼ ψ, the set of nodes activated by selecting dom(ψ) is the same. There-
fore E [f(dom(ψ), Φ) | Φ∼ψ] = ˆf(V +(ψ)). Similarly, if we deﬁne ψ′ := ψ∪{ (e,o )}, then
E [f(dom(ψ)∪{e}, Φ) | Φ∼ψ, Φ(e) =o] = ˆf(V +(ψ′)). Note that once activated, nodes never
become inactive. Hence, ψ⊆ψ′ impliesV +(ψ)⊆V +(ψ′). Since ˆf is monotone by assumption,
this means ˆf(V +(ψ))≤ ˆf(V +(ψ′)) which implies Eq. (8.2) and strong adaptive monotonicity.
Next we establish that these instances are self–certifying. Note that for every φ we have
f(V,φ ) = min
{
Q, ˆf(V )
}
= Q. From our earlier remarks, we know that f(dom(ψ),φ ) =
ˆf(V +(ψ)) for everyφ∼ψ. Hence for allψ andφ,φ′ consistent withψ, we havef(dom(ψ),φ ) =
f(dom(ψ),φ′) and sof(dom(ψ),φ ) =Q if and only iff(dom(ψ),φ′) =Q, which proves that the
instance is self–certifying.
Finally we show that Q andη equal the corresponding terms in the statement of Theorem 5.8.
As noted earlier,f(V,φ ) =Q for allφ. We deﬁnedη as some value such that ˆf(S)>Q−η implies
ˆf(S)≥Q for allS. Since range(f) =
{
min
{
Q, ˆf(S)
}
:S⊆V
}
, it follows that we cannot have
f(S,φ )∈ (Q−η,Q ) for anyS andφ, so thatη satisﬁes the requirements of the corresponding term
in Theorem 5.8. Hence we may apply Theorem 5.8 on this self–certifying instance withQ andη to
obtain the claimed result.
453

GOLOVIN & KRAUSE
9. Application: Automated Diagnosis and Active Learning
An important problem in AI is automated diagnosis. For example, suppose we have different hy-
potheses about the state of a patient, and can run medical tests to rule out inconsistent hypotheses.
The goal is to adaptively choose tests to infer the state of the patient as quickly as possible.
A similar problem arises in active learning. Obtaining labeled data to train a classiﬁer is typically
expensive, as it often involves asking an expert. In active learning (c.f., Cohn, Gharamani, & Jordan,
1996; McCallum & Nigam, 1998), the key idea is that some labels are more informative than others:
labeling a few unlabeled examples can imply the labels of many other unlabeled examples, and thus
the cost of obtaining the labels from an expert can be avoided. As is standard, we assume that
we are given a set of hypotheses H, and a set of unlabeled data points X where each x ∈ X
is independently drawn from some distribution D. Let L be the set of possible labels. Classical
learning theory yields probably approximately correct (PAC) bounds, bounding the number n of
examples drawn i.i.d. fromD needed to output a hypothesish that will have expected error at most
ε with probability at least 1−δ, for some ﬁxedε,δ >0. That is, ifh∗ is the target hypothesis (with
zero error), and error(h) := Px∼D [h(x)⁄=h∗(x)] is the error ofh, we require P [error(h)≤ε]≥
1−δ. The latter probability is taken with respect to D(X); the learned hypothesis h and thus
error(h) depend on it. A key challenge in active learning is to avoid bias: actively selected examples
are no longer i.i.d., and thus sample complexity bounds for passive learning no longer apply. If one
is not careful, active learning may require more samples than passive learning to achieve the same
generalization error. One natural approach to active learning that is guaranteed to perform at least
as well as passive learning is pool-based active learning (McCallum & Nigam, 1998): The idea is
to drawn unlabeled examples i.i.d. However, instead of obtaining all labels, labels are adaptively
requested until the labels of all unlabeled examples are implied by the obtained labels. Now we have
obtainedn labeled examples drawn i.i.d., and classical PAC bounds still apply. The key question is
how to request the labels for the pool to infer the remaining labels as quickly as possible.
In the case of binary labels (or test outcomes) L ={−1, 1}, various authors have considered
greedy policies which generalize binary search (Garey & Graham, 1974; Loveland, 1985; Arkin,
Meijer, Mitchell, Rappaport, & Skiena, 1993; Kosaraju et al., 1999; Dasgupta, 2004; Guillory &
Bilmes, 2009; Nowak, 2009). The simplest of these, called generalized binary search (GBS) or the
splitting algorithm, works as follows. Deﬁne the version spaceV to be the set of hypotheses consis-
tent with the observed labels (here we assume that there is no label noise). In the worst-case setting,
GBS selects a query x∈ X that minimizes
⏐⏐∑
h∈V h(x)
⏐⏐. In the Bayesian setting we assume we
are given a prior pH over hypotheses; in this case GBS selects a query x ∈ X that minimizes⏐⏐∑
h∈V pH(h)·h(x)
⏐⏐. Intuitively these policies myopically attempt to shrink a measure of the ver-
sion space (i.e., the cardinality or the probability mass) as quickly as possible. The former provides
anO(log|H|)-approximation for the worst-case number of queries (Arkin et al., 1993), and the
latter provides anO(log 1
minhpH(h))-approximation for the expected number of queries (Kosaraju
et al., 1999; Dasgupta, 2004) and a natural generalization of GBS obtains the same guarantees
with a larger set of labels (Guillory & Bilmes, 2009). Kosaraju et al. also prove that running GBS
on a modiﬁed prior p′
H(h)∝ max
{
pH(h), 1/|H|2 log|H|
}
is sufﬁcient to obtain anO(log|H|)-
approximation.
Viewed from this perspective of the previous sections, shrinking the version space amounts to
“covering” all false hypotheses with stochastic sets (i.e., queries), where queryx covers all hypothe-
ses that disagree with the target hypothesish∗ atx. That is,x covers{h :h(x)⁄=h∗(x)}. As in§8,
454

ADAPTIVE SUBMODULARITY : T HEORY AND APPLICATIONS
Figure 4: Illustration of the Active Learning problem, in the simple special case of one-dimensional
data and binary threshold hypothesesH ={hτ :τ∈ R}, wherehτ(x) = 1 ifx≥τ and
0 otherwise.
these sets may be correlated in complex ways determined by the set of possible hypotheses. As we
will show, the reduction in version space mass is adaptive submodular, and this allows us to obtain a
new analysis of GBS using adaptive submodularity, which is arguably more amenable to extensions
and generalizations than previous analyses. Our new analysis further allows us to improve on the
previous best bound on the approximation factor of GBS (Dasgupta, 2004) from 4 ln
(
1
minhpH(h)
)
to ln
(
1
minhpH(h)
)
+ 1. We also show that when we apply GBS to a modiﬁed prior distribution, the
approximation factor is improved toO(ln|H|). This result matches a lower bound of Ω(ln|H|) of
Chakaravarthy, Pandit, Roy, Awasthi, and Mohania (2007) up to constant factors.
Theorem 9.1. In the Bayesian setting in which there is a prior pH on a ﬁnite set of hypotheses H,
the generalized binary search algorithm makesOPT·
(
ln
(
1
minhpH(h)
)
+ 1
)
queries in expectation
to identify a hypothesis drawn from pH, where OPT is the minimum expected number of queries
made by any policy. If minhpH(h) is sufﬁciently small, running the algorithm on a modiﬁed prior
p′
H(h)∝ max
{
pH(h), 1/|H|2}
improves the approximation factor toO(ln|H|).
We devote the better part of the remainder of this section to the proof of Theorem 9.1, which has
several components. We ﬁrst address the important special case of a uniform prior over hypotheses,
i.e.,pH(h) = 1/|H| for allh∈ H, and then we reduce the case with a general prior to a uniform
prior. We wish to appeal to Theorem 5.8, so we convert the problem into an Adaptive Stochastic
Min Cost Cover problem.
9.1 The Reduction to Adaptive Stochastic Min Cost Cover
Deﬁne a realizationφh for each hypothesish∈H. The ground set isE =X, and the outcomes are
binary; we deﬁne O ={−1, 1} instead of using{0, 1} to be consistent with our earlier exposition.
For all h∈ H we set φh≡ h, meaning φh(x) = h(x) for all x∈ X. To deﬁne the objective
function, we ﬁrst need some notation. Given observed labels ψ⊂ X×O, let V (ψ) denote the
version space, i.e., the set of hypotheses for which h(x) = ψ(x) for all x∈ dom(ψ). See Fig. 4
for an illustration of an active learning problem in the case of indicator hypotheses. For a set of
hypothesesV , letpH(V ) :=∑
h∈V pH(h) denote their total prior probability. Finally, letψ(S,h ) =
{(x,h (x)) : x∈S} be the function with domainS that agrees withh onS. We deﬁne the objective
455

GOLOVIN & KRAUSE
function by
f(S,φh) := 1 −pH(V (ψ(S,h ))) = pH
({
h′ : ∃x∈S,h′(x)⁄=h(x)
})
and usep (φh) =pH(h) = 1/|H| for allh. Letπ∗ be an optimal policy for this Adaptive Stochastic
Min Cost Cover instance. Note that there is an exact correspondence between policies for the
original problem of ﬁnding the target hypothesis and our problem of covering the true realization;
h∗ is identiﬁed as the target hypothesis if and only if the version space is reduced to {h∗} which
occurs if and only ifφh∗ is covered. Hencecavg(π∗) = OPT. Note that because we have assumed a
uniform prior over hypotheses, we havef(X,φh) = 1−1/|H| for allh. Furthermore, the instances
are self–certifying.
Lemma 9.2. The instances described above are self–certifying for arbitrary priorspH.
Proof. Intuitively, theses instances are self–certifying because to cover φh∗ a policy must identify
φh∗. More formally, these instances are self–certifying because for anyφh andψ such thatφh∼ψ,
we have that f(dom(ψ),φh) = f(X,φh) implies V (ψ) = {h}. This in turn means that φh is
the only realization consistent with ψ, which trivially implies that any realization φ′∼ ψ also has
f(dom(ψ),φ′) =f(X,φ′); hence the instance is self–certifying.
9.2 The Uniform Prior
We next prove that the instances generated are adaptive submodular and strongly adaptive monotone
under a uniform prior.
Lemma 9.3. In the instances described above, f is strongly adaptive monotone and adaptive sub-
modular and with respect to a uniform priorpH.
Proof. Demonstrating strong adaptive monotonicity under a uniform prior amounts to proving that
adding labels cannot grow the version space, which is clear in our model. That is, each query x
eliminates some subset of hypotheses, and as more queries are performed, the subset of hypotheses
eliminated byx cannot grow. Moving on to adaptive submodularity, consider the expected marginal
contribution of x under two partial realizations ψ,ψ′ whereψ is a subrealization of ψ′ (i.e., ψ⊂
ψ′), and x /∈ dom(ψ′). Let ψ[x/o] be the partial realization with domain dom(ψ)∪{x} that
agrees with ψ on its domain, and maps x too. For each o∈ O, let ao := pH(V (ψ[x/o])),bo :=
pH(V (ψ′[x/o])). Since a hypothesis eliminated from the version space cannot later appear in the
version space, we have ao≥ bo for allo. Next, note the expected reduction in version space mass
(and hence the expected marginal contribution) due to selectingx given partial realizationψ is
∆(x|ψ) =
∑
o∈O
ao· P [Φ(x)⁄=o | Φ∼ψ] =
∑
o
ao
(∑
o′⁄=oao′
∑
o′ao′
)
=
∑
o⁄=o′aoao′
∑
o′ao′
. (9.1)
The corresponding quantity for ψ′ hasbo substituted forao in Eq. (9.1), for each o∈ O. To prove
adaptive submodularity we must show ∆(x|ψ)≥ ∆(x|ψ′) and to do so it sufﬁces to show that
∂φ/∂zo≥ 0 for eacho and⃗ z∈
{
⃗ c∈ [0, 1]O :∑
oco> 0
}
, whereφ(⃗ z) :=
(∑
o⁄=o′zozo′
)
/ (∑
o′zo′)
has the same functional form as the expression for∆(x|ψ) in Eq. (9.1). This is because∂φ/∂zo≥ 0
for each o implies that growing the version space in any manner cannot decrease the expected
456

ADAPTIVE SUBMODULARITY : T HEORY AND APPLICATIONS
marginal beneﬁt of query x, and hence shrinking it in any manner cannot increase the expected
marginal beneﬁt of x. It is indeed the case that ∂φ/∂zo≥ 0 for eacho. More speciﬁcally, it holds
that
∂φ
∂za
=
∑
b⁄=az2
b +∑
(b,c):b⁄=c,b⁄=a,c⁄=azbzc
(∑
bzb)2 ≥ 0,
which can be derived through elementary calculus.
Hence we can apply Theorem 5.8 to this self–certifying instance with maximum reward thresh-
oldQ = 1−1/|H|, and minimum gapη = 1/|H|, to obtain an upper bound ofOPT (ln (|H|− 1) + 1)
on the number of queries made by the generalized binary search algorithm (which corresponds ex-
actly to the greedy policy for Adaptive Stochastic Min Cost Cover) under the assumption of a
uniform prior overH.
9.3 Arbitrary Priors
Now consider general priors overH. We construct the Adaptive Stochastic Min Cost Cover instance
as before, only we change the objective function to
f(S,φh) := 1 −pH(V (ψ(S,h ))) +pH(h). (9.2)
First note that the instances remain self–certifying. The proof of Lemma 9.2 goes through com-
pletely unchanged by the modiﬁcation off. We proceed to show adaptive submodularity and strong
adaptive monotonicity.
Lemma 9.4. The objective functionf as described in Eq. (9.2) is strongly adaptive monotone and
adaptive submodular and with respect to arbitrary priorspH.
Proof. The modiﬁed objective is still adaptive submodular, because(S,φh)↦→pH(h) is clearly so,
and because adaptive submodularity is deﬁned via linear inequalities it is preserved under taking
nonnegative linear combinations. Note thatf(X,φh) = 1 for allφh.
Showingf is strongly adaptive monotone requires slightly more work than before. Fix ψ,x /∈
dom(ψ), ando∈O. We must show
E [f(dom(ψ), Φ) | Φ∼ψ]≤ E [f(dom(ψ)∪{x}, Φ) | Φ∼ψ, Φ(x) =o]. (9.3)
Plugging in the deﬁnition off, the inequality we wish to prove may be simpliﬁed to
E [pH(Φ) | Φ∼ψ]− E [pH(Φ) | Φ∼ψ[x/o]] ≤ pH(V (ψ))−pH(V (ψ[x/o])). (9.4)
where Φ is the random realization of the hypothesis, and pH(φh) = pH(h) for allh. Let Velim :=
V (ψ)−V (ψ[x/o]) be the set of hypotheses eliminated from the version space by the observation
h(x) =o. Rewriting Eq. (9.4), we get
∑
h∈V (ψ)
pH(h)2
pH(V (ψ)) −
∑
h∈V (ψ[x/o])
pH(h)2
pH(V (ψ[x/o])) ≤ pH(Velim). (9.5)
457

GOLOVIN & KRAUSE
Let LHS9.5 denote the left hand side of Eq. (9.5). We prove Eq. (9.5) as follows.
LHS9.5 ≤ ∑
h∈VelimpH(h)2/pH(V (ψ)) [ sincepH(V (ψ[x/o]))≤pH(V (ψ))]
≤ ∑
h∈VelimpH(h)·pH(V (ψ))/pH(V (ψ)) [ sinceh∈V (ψ)⇒pH(h)≤pH(V (ψ))]
= pH(Velim)
We conclude thatf is adaptive submodular and strongly adaptive monotone.
Hence we can apply Theorem 5.8 to this self–certifying instance with maximum reward thresh-
old Q = 1 , and minimum gap η = 1/ minhpH(h). As a result we obtain an upper bound of
OPT (ln (1/ minhpH(h)) + 1) on the number of queries made by generalized binary search for
arbitrary priors, completing the proof of Theorem 9.1.
9.4 Improving the Approximation Factor for Highly Nonuniform Priors
To improve this to anO(log|H|)-approximation in the event that minhpH(h) is extremely small
using the observation of Kosaraju et al. (1999), call a policy π progressive if it eliminates at least
one hypothesis from its version space in each query. Let p′
H(h) = max
{
pH(h), 1/|H|2}
/Z
be the modiﬁed prior, where Z := ∑
h′ max
{
pH(h′), 1/|H|2}
is the normalizing constant. Let
c(π,h ) be the cost (i.e., # of queries) of π under target h. Then cavg(π,p ) := ∑
hc(π,h )p(h)
is the expected cost of π under prior p. We will show that cavg(π,p′
H) is a good approxima-
tion to cavg(π,pH). Call h rare if pH(h) < 1/|H|2, and common otherwise. First, note that∑
h′ max
{
pH(h′), 1/|H|2}
≤ 1 + 1/|H|, and sop′
H(h)≥ |H|
|H|+1pH(h), for allh. Hence for allπ,
we havecavg(π,p′
H)≥ |H|
|H|+1cavg(π,pH). Next, we showcavg(π,p′
H)≤cavg(π,pH) + 1. Consider
the quantitycavg(π,p′
H)−cavg(π,pH) =∑
hc(π,h ) (p′
H(h)−pH(h)). The positive contributions
must come from rare hypotheses. However, the total probability mass of these under p′
H is at most
1/|H|, and since π is progressivec(π,h )≤| H| for all h, hence the difference in costs is at most
one. Letα := ln
(
1
minhp′
H(h)
)
+ 1≤ ln
(
|H|2 +|H|
)
+ 1 be the approximation factor for general-
ized binary search when run onp′
H. Let π be the policy of generalized binary search, and letπ∗ be
an optimal policy under priorpH. Then
cavg(π,pH)≤|H| + 1
|H| cavg(π,p′
H)≤|H| + 1
|H| αc avg(π∗,p′
H)≤|H| + 1
|H| α
(
cavg(π∗,pH) + 1
)
.
With some further algebra, we can derive cavg(π,pH)≤
(
cavg(π∗,pH) + 1
)(
ln
(
2e|H|2))
. Thus
for a general prior a simple modiﬁcation of GBS yields anO(log|H|)-approximation.
9.5 Extensions to Arbitrary Costs, Multiple Classes, and Approximate Greedy Policies
This result easily generalizes to handle the setting of multiple classes / test outcomes (i.e.,|O|≥ 2),
andα-approximate greedy policies, where we lose a factor ofα in the approximation factor. As we
describe in the Appendix, we can generalize adaptive submodularity to incorporate costs on items,
which allows us to extend this result to handle query costs as well. We can therefore recover these
extensions of Guillory and Bilmes (2009), while improving the approximation factor for GBS with
item costs to ln
(
1
minhpH(h)
)
+ 1. Guillory and Bilmes also showed how to extend the technique
458

ADAPTIVE SUBMODULARITY : T HEORY AND APPLICATIONS
of Kosaraju et al. (1999) to obtain an O
(
log
(
|H| maxxc(x)
minxc(x)
))
-approximation with costs using a
greedy policy, which may be combined with our tighter analysis as well to give a similar result
with an improved leading constant. Recently, Gupta, Krishnaswamy, Nagarajan, and Ravi (2010)
showed how to simultaneously remove the dependence on both costs and probabilities from the
approximation ratio. Speciﬁcally, within the context of studying an adaptive travelling salesman
problem they investigated the Optimal Decision Tree problem, which is equivalent to the active
learning problem we consider here. Using a clever, more complex algorithm than adaptive greedy,
they achieve anO (log|H|)-approximation in the case of non-uniform costs and general priors.
9.6 Extensions to Active Learning with Noisy Observations
Theorem 9.1 and the extensions mentioned so far are in the noise free case, i.e., the result of queryx
and observesh∗(x), whereh∗ is the target hypothesis. Many practical problems may havenoisy ob-
servations. Nowak (2009) considered the case in which the outcomes are binary, i.e.,O ={−1, 1},
the same query may be asked multiple times, and for each instance of each query the noise is in-
dependent. In this case he gives performance guarantees for generalized binary search. While this
setting may be appropriate if the noise is due to measurement error, in some applications the noise
is persistent, i.e., if query x is asked several times, the observation is always the same. Recently,
Golovin et al. (2010) and Bellala and Scott (2010) have used the adaptive submodularity frame-
work to obtain the ﬁrst algorithms with provable (logarithmic) approximation guarantees for active
learning with persistent noise.
10. Experiments
Greedy algorithms are often straightforward to develop and implement, which explains their pop-
ular use in practical applications, such as Bayesian experimental design and Active Learning, as
discussed in§9 (also see the excellent introduction of Nowak, 2009) and Adaptive Stochastic Set
Cover, e.g., for ﬁlter design in streaming databases as discussed in§7. Besides allowing us to prove
approximation guarantees for such algorithms, adaptive submodularity provides the following im-
mediate practical beneﬁts:
1. The ability to use lazy evaluations to speed up its execution.
2. The ability to generate data-dependent bounds on the optimal value.
In this section, we empirically evaluate their beneﬁts within a sensor selection application, in a
setting similar to the one described by Deshpande, Guestrin, Madden, Hellerstein, and Hong (2004).
In this application, we have deployed a networkV of wireless sensors, e.g., to monitor temperature
in a building or trafﬁc in a road network. Since sensors are battery constrained, we must adaptively
selectk sensors, and then, given those sensor readings, predict, e.g., the temperature at all remaining
locations. This prediction is possible since temperature measurements will typically be correlated
across space. Here, we will consider the case where sensors can fail to report measurements due to
hardware failures, environmental conditions or interference.
10.1 The Sensor Selection Problem with Unreliable Sensors
More formally, we imagine every locationv∈V is associated with a random variableXv describing
the temperature at that location, and there is a joint probability distributionp (xV ) := P [XV = xV ]
that models the correlation between temperature values. Here, XV = [X1,..., Xn] is the random
459

GOLOVIN & KRAUSE
vector over all temperature values. We follow Deshpande et al. (2004) and assume that the joint
distribution of the sensors is multivariate Gaussian. A sensorv can make a noisy observationYv =
Xv +εv, where εv is zero mean Gaussian noise with known variance σ2. If some measurements
YA = yA are obtained at a subset of locations, then the conditional distribution p (xV| yA) :=
P [XV = xV|Y A = yA] allows predictions at the unobserved locations, e.g., by predicting E[XV|
YA = yA] (which minimizes the mean squared error). Furthermore, this conditional distribution
quantiﬁes the uncertainty in the prediction: Intuitively, we would like to select sensors that minimize
the predictive uncertainty. One way to quantify the predictive uncertainty is to use the remaining
Shannon entropy
H (XV|Y A = yA) := E [− log2 (p (XV| yA))].
We would like to adaptively select k sensors, to maximize the expected reduction in Shannon en-
tropy (c.f., Sebastiani & Wynn, 2000; Krause & Guestrin, 2009b). However, in practice, sensors are
often unreliable, and might fail to report their measurements. We assume that after selecting a sen-
sor, we ﬁnd out whether it has failed or not before deciding which sensor to select next. We suppose
that each sensor has an associated probabilitypfail(v) of failure, in which case no reading is reported,
and that sensor failures are independent of each other and of the ambient temperature atv. Thus we
have an instance of the Stochastic Maximization problem with E := V ,O :={working, failed},
and
f(A,φ ) := H (XV )− H
(
XV | y{v :φ(v)=working}
)
. (10.1)
For multivariate normal distributions, the entropy is given as
H (XV|Y A = yA) = 1
2 ln(2πe)n
⏐⏐⏐ΣVA
(
ΣAA +σ2I
)−1
ΣAV
⏐⏐⏐,
where for setsA andB, ΣAB denotes the covariance (matrix) between random vectorsXA andXB.
Note that the predictive covariance does not depend on the actual observations yA, only on the set
A of chosen locations. Thus,
H (XV|Y A = yA) = H (XV|Y A),
where as usual, H (XV | YA) = E [H (XV | YA = yA)]. As Krause and Guestrin (2005) show,
the function
g(A) := I (XV ;YA) = H (XV )− H (XV|Y A) (10.2)
is monotone submodular, whenever the observationsYV are conditionally independent givenXV .
This insight allows us to apply the result of§6 to show that the objectivef deﬁned in Eq. (10.1)
is adaptive monotone submodular, using ˆf(S) :=g({v : (v, working)∈S}) for anyS⊆E×O.
10.1.1 D ATA AND EXPERIMENTAL SETUP
Our ﬁrst data set consists of temperature measurements from the network of 46 sensors deployed at
Intel Research Berkeley, which were sampled at30 second intervals for 5 consecutive days (starting
Feb. 28th, 2004). We deﬁne our objective function with respect to the empirical covariance estimated
from the data.
We also use data from trafﬁc sensors deployed along the highway I- 880 South in California.
We use trafﬁc speed data for all working days from 6 AM to 11 AM for one month, from 357
sensors. The goal is to predict the speed on all 357 road segments. We again estimate the empirical
covariance matrix.
460

ADAPTIVE SUBMODULARITY : T HEORY AND APPLICATIONS
10.1.2 T HE BENEFITS OF LAZY EVALUATION
For both data sets, we run the adaptive greedy algorithm, using both the naive implementation (Al-
gorithm 1) and the accelerated version using lazy evaluations (Algorithm 2). We vary the probability
of sensor failure, and evaluate the execution time and the number of evaluations of the function g
(deﬁned in Eq. (10.2)) each algorithm makes. Figures 5(a) and 5(b) plot execution time given a
50% sensor failure rate, on a computer with a 2.26 GHz dual core processor and 4 GB RAM. In
these applications, function evaluations are the bottleneck in the computation, so the number of
them serves as a machine-independent proxy for the running time. Figures 5(c) and 5(d) show the
performance ratio in terms of this proxy. On the temperature data set, lazy evaluations speed up the
computation by a factor of between roughly 3.5 and 7, depending on the failure probability. On the
larger trafﬁc data set, we obtain speedup factors between 30 and 38. We ﬁnd that the beneﬁt of the
lazy evaluations increases with the problem size and with the failure probability. The dependence on
problem size must ultimately be explained in terms of structural properties of the instances, which
also beneﬁt the nonadaptive accelerated greedy algorithm. The dependence on failure probability
has a simpler explanation. Note that in these applications, if the accelerated greedy algorithm se-
lectsv, which then fails, then it does not need to make any additional function evaluations to select
the next sensor. Contrast this with the naive greedy algorithm, which makes a function evaluation
for each sensor that has not been selected so far.
10.1.3 T HE BENEFITS OF THE DATA DEPENDENT BOUND
While adaptive submodularity allows us to prove worst-case performance guarantees for the adap-
tive greedy algorithm, in many practical applications it can be expected that these bounds are quite
loose. For our sensor selection application, we use the data dependent bounds of Lemma 5.3 to
compute an upper bound βavg on maxπfavg(π[k]) as described below, and compare it with the per-
formance guarantee of Theorem 5.2. For the accelerated greedy algorithm, we use the upper bounds
on the marginal beneﬁts stored in the priority queue instead of recomputing the marginal beneﬁts,
and thus expect somewhat looser bounds. We ﬁnd that for our application, the bounds are tighter
than the worst case bounds. We also ﬁnd that the “lazy” data dependent bounds are almost as tight as
the “eager” bounds using the eagerly recomputed marginal beneﬁts∆(e|ψ) for the latest and great-
estψ, though the former have slightly higher variance. Figures 5(e) and 5(f) show the performance
of the greedy algorithm as well as the three bounds on the optimal value.
Two subtleties arise when using the data-dependent bounds to bound maxπfavg(π[k]). The
ﬁrst is that Lemma 5.3 tells us that ∆
(
π∗
[k]|ψ
)
≤ maxA⊆E,|A|≤k
∑
e∈A ∆(e|ψ), whereas we
would like to bound the difference between the optimal reward and the algorithm’s current expected
reward, conditioned on seeing ψ, i.e., E
[
f(E(π∗
[k], Φ), Φ)−f(dom(ψ), Φ) | Φ∼ψ
]
. However,
in our applicationsf is strongly adaptive monotone, and strong adaptive monotonicity implies that
for anyπ∗ we have
E
[
f(E(π∗
[k], Φ), Φ)−f(dom(ψ), Φ) | Φ∼ψ
]
≤ ∆
(
π∗
[k]|ψ
)
. (10.3)
Hence, if we let OPT(ψ) := maxπ E
[
f(E(π[k], Φ), Φ) | Φ∼ψ
]
, Lemma 5.3 implies that
OPT(ψ)≤ E [f(dom(ψ), Φ) | Φ∼ψ] + max
A⊆E,|A|≤k
∑
e∈A
∆(e|ψ). (10.4)
461

GOLOVIN & KRAUSE
The second subtlety is that we obtain a sequence of bounds from Eq. (10.4). If we consider the
(random) sequence of partial realizations observed by the adaptive greedy algorithm, ∅ = ψ0⊂
ψ1⊂···⊂ ψk, we obtaink + 1 boundsβ0,...,β k, whereβi := E [f(dom(ψi), Φ) | Φ∼ψi] +
maxA⊆E,|A|≤k
∑
e∈A ∆(e|ψi). Taking the expectation over Φ, note that for anyπ, and anyi,
favg(π[k])≤ E [OPT(ψi)]≤ E [βi].
Therefore for any 0≤ i≤ k , βi is a random variable whose expectation is an upper bound on
the optimal expected reward of any policy. At this point we may be tempted to use the minimum
of these, i.e.,βmin := mini{βi} as our ultimate bound. However, a collection of random variables
X0,...,X k with E [Xi]≥ τ for all i does not, in general, satisfy mini{Xi}≥ τ. While it is
possible in our case, with its independent sensor failures, to use concentration inequalities to bound
mini{βi}− mini{E [βi]} with high probability, and thus add an appropriate term to obtain a true
upper bound from βmin, we take a different approach; we simply use the average bound βavg :=
1
k+1
∑k
i=0βi. Of course, depending on the application, a particular boundβi (chosen independently
of the sequence ψ0,ψ 1,...,ψ k) may be superior. For example, if g is modular, then β0 is best,
whereas if g exhibits strong diminishing returns, then bounds βi with larger values of i may be
signiﬁcantly tighter.
11. Adaptivity Gap
An important question in adaptive optimization is how much better adaptive policies can perform
when compared to non-adaptive policies. This is quantiﬁed by the adaptivity gap, which is the
worst-case ratio, over problem instances, of the performance of the optimal adaptive policy to the
optimal non-adaptive solution. Asadpour et al. (2008) show that in the Stochastic Submodular
Maximization problem with independent failures (as considered in §6), the expected value of the
optimal non-adaptive policy is at most a constant factor 1− 1/e worse than the expected value
of the optimal adaptive policy. While we currently do not have lower bounds for the adaptivity
gap of the general Adaptive Stochastic Maximization problem (2.1), we can show that even in the
case of adaptive submodular functions, the min-cost cover and min-sum cover versions have large
adaptivity gaps, and thus there is a large beneﬁt of using adaptive algorithms. In these cases, the
adaptivity gap is deﬁned as the worst-case ratio of the expected cost of the optimal non-adaptive
policy divided by the expected cost of the optimal adaptive policy. For the Adaptive Stochastic
Minimum Cost Coverage problem (2.2), Goemans and V ondr ´ak (2006) show the special case of
Stochastic Set Coverage without multiplicities has an adaptivity gap of Ω(|E|). Below we exhibit
an adaptive stochastic optimization instance with adaptivity gap ofΩ(|E|/ log|E|) for the Adaptive
Stochastic Min-Sum Cover problem (2.3), which also happens to have the same adaptivity gap for
Adaptive Stochastic Minimum Cost Coverage.
Theorem 11.1. Even for adaptive submodular functions, the adaptivity gap of Adaptive Stochastic
Min-Sum Cover is Ω(n/ logn), wheren =|E|.
Proof. Suppose E = {1,...,n }. Consider the active learning problem where our hypotheses
h : E → {−1, 1} are threshold functions, i.e., h(e) = 1 if e ≥ 𝓁 and h(e) = −1 if e < 𝓁
for some threshold 𝓁. There is a uniform distribution over thresholds 𝓁 ∈ {1,...,n + 1}. In
order to identify the correct hypothesis with threshold 𝓁, our policy must observe at least one of
𝓁− 1 or 𝓁 (and both of them if 1 < 𝓁≤ n). Let ˆπ be an optimal non-adaptive policy for this
462

ADAPTIVE SUBMODULARITY : T HEORY AND APPLICATIONS
0 5 10 15 20 25 30 35 40 45 500
0.05
0.1
0.15
0.2
0.25
0.3
0.35
0.4
0.45
Time for Standard and Accelerated Adaptive Greedy
Accelerated Adaptive Greedy
Adaptive Greedy
(a) Temperature Data: Execution time (sec) for
the naive vs accelerated implementations of adap-
tive greedy vs. the budgetk on number of sensors
selected, when pfail(v) = 0 .5 for all v, plotted
with standard errors.
0 50 100 150 200 250 300 3500
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
Time for Standard and Accelerated Adaptive Greedy
Adaptive Greedy
Accelerated Adaptive Greedy
(b) Trafﬁc Data: Execution time (sec) for the
naive vs accelerated implementations of adap-
tive greedy vs. the budget k on number of sen-
sors selected, when pfail(v) = 0 .5 for all v,
plotted with standard errors.
0 10 20 30 40 50
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
Redu ction in Function Evaluations vs. Pr[failure]
90%
80%
70%
60%
50%
40%
30%
20%
10%
(c) Temperature Data: The ratio of function eval-
uations made by the naive vs accelerated imple-
mentations of adaptive greedy vs. the budget k
on number of sensors selected, for various failure
rates. Averaged over 100 runs.
0 100 200 300 4000
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45
50%
25%
75%
Reduction in Function Evaluations vs . Pr [failur e]
(d) Trafﬁc Data: The ratio of function evaluations
made by the naive vs accelerated implementations
of adaptive greedy vs. the budget k on number of
sensors selected, for various failure rates. Aver-
aged over 10 runs.
0 5 10 15 20 25 30 35 40 45 500
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
80
90
100
Reward for Adaptive Greedy, with Data−Dependent Bounds
Adaptive Greedy
Standard Bound
Lazy Adaptive Bound
Adaptive Bound
(e) Temperature Data: Rewards & bounds on the
optimal value whenpfail(v) = 0.5 for allv vs. the
budgetk on number of sensors selected, plotted
with standard errors.
0 50 100 150 200 250 300 350 4000
50
100
150
Reward for Adaptive Greedy, with Data−Dependent Bounds
Adaptive Greedy
Standard Bound
Lazy Adaptive Bound
Adaptive Bound
(f) Trafﬁc Data: Rewards & bounds on the op-
timal value when pfail(v) = 0 .5 for all v vs. the
budgetk on number of sensors selected, plotted
with standard errors.
Figure 5: Experimental results.
463

GOLOVIN & KRAUSE
problem. Note that ˆπ can be represented as a permutation of E, because observing an element
multiple times can only increase the cost while providing no beneﬁt over observing it once, and
each element must eventually be selected to guarantee coverage. For the min-sum cover objective,
consider playing ˆπ forn/4 time steps. Then P [𝓁 observed inn/4 steps] = n/4(n + 1). Likewise
P [𝓁− 1 observed inn/4 steps] = n/4(n + 1). Since at least one of these events must occur to
identify the correct hypothesis, by a union bound
P [ˆπ identiﬁes the correct hypothesis inn/4 steps] ≤ n
2(n + 1) ≤ 1/2.
Thus a lower bound on the expected cost of ˆπ is n/8, since for n/4 time steps a cost of at least
1/2 is incurred. Thus, for both the min-cost and min-sum cover objectives the cost of the optimal
non-adaptive policy is Ω(n).
As an example adaptive policy, we can implement a natural binary search strategy, which is
guaranteed to identify the correct hypothesis after O(logn) steps, thus incurring cost O(logn),
proving an adaptivity gap of Ω(n/ logn).
12. Hardness of Approximation
In this paper, we have developed the notion of adaptive submodularity, which characterizes when
certain adaptive stochastic optimization problems are well-behaved in the sense that a simple greedy
policy obtains a constant factor or logarithmic factor approximation to the best policy.
In contrast, we can also show that without adaptive submodularity, the adaptive stochastic op-
timization problems (2.1), (2.2), and (2.3) are extremely inapproximable, even with (pointwise)
modular objective functions (i.e., those where for each φ,f : 2E×OE→ R is modular/linear in
the ﬁrst argument): We cannot hope to achieve an O(|E|1−ε) approximation ratio for these prob-
lems, unless the polynomial hierarchy collapses down to ΣP
2 .
Theorem 12.1. For all (possibly non-constant)β≥ 1, no polynomial time algorithm for Adaptive
Stochastic Maximization with a budget ofβk items can approximate the reward of an optimal policy
with a budget of onlyk items to within a multiplicative factor ofO(|E|1−ε/β) for anyε> 0, unless
PH = ΣP
2 . This holds even for pointwise modularf.
We provide the proof of Theorem 12.1 in Appendix A.7. Note that by setting β = 1 , we
obtainO(|E|1−ε) hardness for Adaptive Stochastic Maximization. It turns out that in the instance
distribution we construct in the proof of Theorem 12.1 the optimal policy covers every realization
(i.e., always ﬁnds the treasure) using a budget of k = O(|E|ε/2) items. Hence if PH ⁄= Σ P
2
then any randomized polynomial time algorithm wishing to cover this instance must have a budget
β = Ω(|E|1−ε) times larger than the optimal policy, in order to ensure the ratio of rewards, which
is Ω(|E|1−ε/β), equals one. This yields the following corollary.
Corollary 12.2. No polynomial time algorithm for Adaptive Stochastic Min Cost Coverage can
approximate the cost of an optimal policy to within a multiplicative factor of O(|E|1−ε) for any
ε> 0, unless PH = ΣP
2 . This holds even for pointwise modularf.
Furthermore, since in the instance distribution we construct the optimal policy π∗ covers every
realization using a budget of k, it has cΣ(π∗)≤ k. Moreover, since we have shown that under
our complexity theoretic assumptions, any polynomial time randomized policy π with budget βk
464

ADAPTIVE SUBMODULARITY : T HEORY AND APPLICATIONS
achieves at most o(β/|E|1−ε) of the (unit) value obtained by the optimal policy with budget k, it
follows that cΣ(π) = Ω( βk). Since we require β = Ω(|E|1−ε) to cover any set of realizations
constituting, e.g., half of the probability mass, we obtain the following corollary.
Corollary 12.3. No polynomial time algorithm for Adaptive Stochastic Min-Sum Cover can ap-
proximate the cost of an optimal policy to within a multiplicative factor ofO(|E|1−ε) for anyε> 0,
unless PH = ΣP
2 . This holds even for pointwise modularf.
13. Related Work
There is a large literature on adaptive optimization under partial observability which relates to adap-
tive submodularity, which can be broadly organized into several different categories. Here, we only
review relevant related work that is not already discussed elsewhere in the manuscript.
13.1 Adaptive Versions of Classic Non-adaptive Optimization Problems
Many approaches consider stochastic generalizations of speciﬁc classic non-adaptive optimization
problems, such as Set Cover (Goemans & V ondr´ak, 2006; Liu et al., 2008), Knapsack (Dean, Goe-
mans, & V ondr´ak, 2008, 2005) and Traveling Salesman (Gupta et al., 2010). In contrast, in this
paper our goal is to introduce a general problem structure – adaptive submodularity – that uniﬁes
a number of adaptive optimization problems. This is similar to how the classic notion of submod-
ularity uniﬁes various optimization problems such as Set Cover, Facility Location, nonadaptive
Bayesian Experimental Design, etc.
13.2 Competitive Online Optimization
Another active area of research in sequential optimization is the study of competitive online algo-
rithms. A particularly relevant example is Online Set Cover (Alon, Awerbuch, Azar, Buchbinder,
& Naor, 2009), where there is a known set system, an arbitrary sequence of elements is presented
to the algorithm, and the algorithm must irrevocably select sets to purchase such that at all times
the purchased sets cover all elements which have appeared so far. Alon et al. (2009) obtain a
polylogarithmic approximation to this problem, via an online primal–dual framework which has
been proﬁtably applied to many other problems. Buchbinder and Naor (2009) provide a detailed
treatment of this framework. Note that competitive analysis focuses on worst–case scenarios. In
contrast, we assume probabilistic information about the world and optimize for the average case.
13.3 (Noisy) Interactive Submodular Set Cover
Recent work by Guillory and Bilmes (2010, 2011) considers a class of adaptive optimization prob-
lems over a family of monotone submodular objectives{fh :h∈H}. In their problem, one must
cover a monotone submodular objective fh∗ which depends on the (initially unknown) target hy-
pothesish∗∈H, by adaptively issuing queries and getting responses. Unlike traditional pool-based
active learning, each query may generate a response from a set of valid responses depending on the
target hypothesis. The reward is calculated by evaluating fh∗ on the set of (query, response) pairs
observed, and the goal is to obtain some thresholdQ of objective value at minimum total query cost,
where queries may have nonuniform costs. In the noisy variant of the problem (Guillory & Bilmes,
2011), the set of (query, response) pairs observed need not be consistent with any hypothesis inH,
465

GOLOVIN & KRAUSE
and the goal is to obtain Q of value for all hypotheses that are “close” to being consistent with the
observations. For both variants, Guillory and Bilmes consider the worst-case policy cost, and pro-
vide greedy algorithms optimizing clever hybrid objective functions. They prove an approximation
guarantee of ln(Q|H|) + 1 for integer valued objective functions{fh}h∈H in the noise–free case,
and similar logarithmic approximation guarantees for the noisy case.
While similar in spirit to this work, there are several signiﬁcant differences between the two.
Guillory and Bilmes focus on worst-case policy cost, while we focus mainly on average-case policy
cost. The structure of adaptive submodularity depends on the prior p (φ), whereas there is no such
dependence in Interactive Submodular Set Cover. This dependence in turn allows us to obtain
results, such as Theorem 5.8 for self–certifying instances, whose approximation guarantee does not
depend on the number of realizations in the way that the guarantees for Interactive Submodular Set
Cover depend on|H|. As Guillory and Bilmes prove, the latter dependence is fundamental under
reasonable complexity-theoretic assumptions 6. An interesting open problem within the adaptive
submodularity framework that is highlighted by the work on Interactive Submodular Set Cover is
to identify useful instance-speciﬁc properties that are sufﬁcient to improve upon the worst-case
approximation guarantee of Theorem 5.9.
13.4 Greedy Frameworks for Adaptive Optimization
The paper that is perhaps closest in spirit to this work is the one on Stochastic Depletion problems
by Chan and Farias (2009), who also identify a general class of adaptive optimization problems
than can be near-optimally solved using greedy algorithms (which in their setting give a factor
2 approximation). However, the similarity is mainly on a conceptual level: The problems and
approaches, as well as example applications considered, are quite different.
13.5 Stochastic Optimization with Recourse
A class of adaptive optimization problems studied extensively in operations research (since Dantzig,
1955) is the area of stochastic optimization with recourse. Here, an optimization problem, such as
Set Cover, Steiner Tree or Facility Location, is presented in multiple stages. At each stage, more
information is revealed, but costs of actions increase. A key difference to the problems studied in
this paper is that in these problems, information gets revealed independently of the actions taken by
the algorithm. There are general efﬁcient, sampling based (approximate) reductions of multi-stage
optimization to the deterministic setting (see, e.g., Gupta, P´al, Ravi, & Sinha, 2005).
13.6 Bayesian Global Optimization
Adaptive Stochastic Optimization is also related to the problem of Bayesian Global Optimization
(c.f., Brochu, Cora, & de Freitas, 2009, for a recent survey of the area). In Bayesian Global Opti-
mization, the goal is to adaptively select inputs in order to maximize an unknown function that is
expensive to evaluate (and can possibly only be evaluated using noisy observations). A common ap-
proach that has been successful in many applications (c.f., Lizotte, Wang, Bowling, & Schuurmans,
2007, for a recent application in machine learning), is to assume a prior distribution, such as a Gaus-
6. They reduce to Set Cover and use the result of Feige (1998), which requires the assumption NP ⊈
DTIME(nO(log log n)), but it sufﬁces to assume only P ⁄= NP using the Set Cover approximation hardness result
of Raz and Safra (1997) instead.
466

ADAPTIVE SUBMODULARITY : T HEORY AND APPLICATIONS
sian process, over the unknown objective function. Several criteria for selecting inputs have been
developed, such as the Expected Improvement (Jones, Schonlau, & Welch, 1998) criterion. How-
ever, while recently performance guarantees where obtained in the no-regret setting (Gr ¨unew¨alder,
Audibert, Opper, & Shawe-Taylor, 2010; Srinivas, Krause, Kakade, & Seeger, 2010), we are not
aware of any approximation guarantees for Bayesian Global Optimization.
13.7 Probabilistic Planning
The problem of decision making under partial observability has also been extensively studied in
stochastic optimal control. In particular, Partially Observable Markov Decision Processes (POMDPs,
Smallwood & Sondik, 1973) are a general framework that captures many adaptive optimization
problems under partial observability. Unfortunately, solving POMDPs is PSPACE hard (Papadim-
itriou & Tsitsiklis, 1987), thus typically heuristic algorithms with no approximation guarantees are
applied (Pineau, Gordon, & Thrun, 2006; Ross, Pineau, Paquet, & Chaib-draa, 2008). For some
special instances of POMDPs related to Multi-armed Bandit problems, (near-)optimal policies can
be found. These include the (optimal) Gittins-index policy for the classic Multi-armed Bandit prob-
lem (Gittins & Jones, 1979) and approximate policies for the Multi-armed Bandit problem with
metric switching costs (Guha & Munagala, 2009) and special cases of the Restless Bandit prob-
lem (Guha, Munagala, & Shi, 2009). The problems considered in this paper can be formalized as
POMDPs, albeit with exponentially large state space (where the world state represents the selected
items and state/outcome of each item). Thus our results can be interpreted as widening the class of
partially observable planning problems that can be efﬁciently approximately solved.
13.8 Previous Work by the Authors & Subsequent Developments
This manuscript is an extended version of a paper that appeared in the Conference on Learning
Theory (COLT; Golovin & Krause, 2010). More recently, Golovin and Krause (2011) proved per-
formance guarantees for the greedy policy for the problem of maximizing the expected value of a
policy under constraints more complex than simply selecting at most k items. These include ma-
troid constraints, where a policy can only select independent sets of items and the greedy policy
obtains a 1/2–approximation for adaptive monotone submodular objectives, and more generally
p-independence system constraints, where the greedy policy obtains a 1/(p + 1)–approximation.
Golovin et al. (2010) and, shortly thereafter, Bellala and Scott (2010), used the adaptive submodu-
larity framework to obtain the ﬁrst algorithms with provable (logarithmic) approximation guarantees
for the difﬁcult and fundamental problem of active learning with persistent noise. Finally, Golovin,
Krause, Gardner, Converse, and Morey (2011) used adaptive submodularity in the context of a
dynamic conservation planning, and obtain competitiveness guarantees for an ecological reserve
design problem.
14. Conclusions
Planning under partial observability is a central but notoriously difﬁcult problem in artiﬁcial intel-
ligence. In this paper, we identiﬁed a novel, general class of adaptive optimization problems under
uncertainty that are amenable to efﬁcient, greedy (approximate) solution. In particular, we intro-
duced the concept of adaptive submodularity, generalizing submodular set functions to adaptive
policies. Our generalization is based on a natural adaptive analog of the diminishing returns prop-
467

GOLOVIN & KRAUSE
erty well understood for set functions. In the special case of deterministic distributions, adaptive
submodularity reduces to the classical notion of submodular set functions. We proved that several
guarantees carried by the non-adaptive greedy algorithm for submodular set functions generalize to
a natural adaptive greedy algorithm in the case of adaptive submodular functions, for constrained
maximization and certain natural coverage problems with both minimum cost and minimum sum
objectives. We also showed how the adaptive greedy algorithm can be accelerated using lazy eval-
uations, and how one can compute data-dependent bounds on the optimal solution. We illustrated
the usefulness of the concept by giving several examples of adaptive submodular objectives arising
in diverse AI applications including sensor placement, viral marketing, automated diagnosis and
pool-based active learning. Proving adaptive submodularity for these problems allowed us to re-
cover existing results in these applications as special cases and lead to natural generalizations. Our
experiments on real data indicate that adaptive submodularity can provide practical beneﬁts, such
as signiﬁcant speed ups and tighter data-dependent bounds. We believe that our results provide an
interesting step in the direction of exploiting structure to solve complex stochastic optimization and
planning problems under partial observability.
Acknowledgments
An extended abstract of this work appeared in COLT 2010 (Golovin & Krause, 2010). We wish to
thank the anonymous referees for their helpful suggestions. This research was partially supported by
ONR grant N00014-09-1-1044, NSF grant CNS-0932392, NSF grant IIS-0953413, DARPA MSEE
grant FA8650-11-1-7156, a gift by Microsoft Corporation, an Okawa Foundation Research Grant,
and by the Caltech Center for the Mathematics of Information.
Appendix A. Additional Proofs and Incorporating Item Costs
In this appendix we provide all of the proofs omitted from the main text. For the results of §5, we
do so by ﬁrst explaining how our results generalize to the case where items have costs, and then
proving generalizations which incorporate item costs.
A.1 Incorporating Costs: Preliminaries
In this section we provide the preliminaries required to deﬁne and analyze the versions of our prob-
lems with non-uniform item costs. We suppose each item e∈ E has a cost c(e), and the cost of a
setS⊆ E is given by the modular function c(S) = ∑
e∈Sc(e). We deﬁne the generalizations of
problems (2.1), (2.2), and (2.3) in§A.3,§A.4, and§A.5, respectively.
Our results are with respect to the greedy policy πgreedy and α-approximate greedy policies.
With costs, the greedy policy selects an item maximizing ∆(e|ψ)/c(e), where ψ is the current
partial realization.
Deﬁnition A.1 (Approximate Greedy Policy with Costs) . A policy π is an α-approximate greedy
policy if for allψ such that there existse∈E with ∆(e|ψ)> 0,
π(ψ)∈
{
e : ∆(e|ψ)
c(e) ≥ 1
α max
e′
(∆(e′|ψ)
c(e′)
)}
,
and π terminates upon observing any ψ such that ∆(e|ψ)≤ 0 for all e∈ E. That is, an α-
approximate greedy policy always obtains at least (1/α) of the maximum possible ratio of condi-
468

ADAPTIVE SUBMODULARITY : T HEORY AND APPLICATIONS
tional expected marginal beneﬁt to cost, and terminates when no more beneﬁt can be obtained in
expectation. A greedy policy is any 1-approximate greedy policy.
It will be convenient to imagine the policy executing over time, such that when a policyπ selects
an item e, it starts to run e, and ﬁnishes running e after c(e) units of time. We next generalize
the deﬁnition of policy truncation. Actually we require three such generalizations, which are all
equivalent in the unit cost case.
Deﬁnition A.2 (Strict Policy Truncation) . The strict level t truncation of a policy π, denoted by
π[←t], is obtained by running π for t time units, and unselecting items whose runs have not ﬁn-
ished by time t. Formally, π[←t] has domain
{
ψ∈ dom(π) : c(π(ψ)) +∑
e∈dom(ψ)c(e)≤t
}
,
and agrees withπ everywhere in its domain.
Deﬁnition A.3 (Lax Policy Truncation). The lax levelt truncation of a policyπ, denoted byπ[t→],
is obtained by runningπ fort time units, and selecting the items running at timet. Formally,π[t→]
has domain
{
ψ∈ dom(π) : ∑
e∈dom(ψ)c(e)<t
}
, and agrees withπ everywhere in its domain.
Deﬁnition A.4 (Policy Truncation with Costs) . The level-t-truncation of a policy π, denoted by
π[t], is a randomized policy obtained by running π for t time units, and if some item e has been
running for 0≤ τ < c(e) time at time t, selecting e independently with probability τ/c(e). For-
mally,π[t] is a randomized policy that agrees with π everywhere in its domain, has dom(π[←t])⊆
dom(π[t])⊆ dom(π[t→]) with certainty, and includes each ψ∈ dom(π[t→])\ dom(π[←t]) in its
domain independently with probability
(
t−∑
e∈dom(ψ)c(e)
)
/c(π(ψ)).
In the proofs that follow, we will need a notion of the conditional expected cost of a policy, as
well as an alternate characterization of adaptive monotonicity, based on a notion of policy concate-
nation. We prove the equivalence of our two adaptive monotonicity conditions in Lemma A.8.
Deﬁnition A.5 (Conditional Policy Cost). The conditional policy cost ofπ conditioned on ψ, de-
noted c (π|ψ), is the expected cost of the items π selects under p (φ|ψ). That is, c (π|ψ) :=
E [c(E(π, Φ)) | Φ∼ψ].
Deﬁnition A.6 (Policy Concatenation). Given two policies π1 andπ2 deﬁneπ1@π2 as the policy
obtained by runningπ1 to completion, and then running policyπ2 as if from a fresh start, ignoring
the information gathered7 during the running ofπ1.
Deﬁnition A.7 (Adaptive Monotonicity (Alternate Version)) . A function f : 2E×OE → R≥0
is adaptive monotone with respect to distribution p (φ) if for all policies π and π′, it holds that
favg(π)≤favg(π′@π), wherefavg(π) := E [f(E(π, Φ), Φ)] is deﬁned w.r.t.p (φ).
Lemma A.8 (Adaptive Monotonicity Equivalence). Fix a function f : 2E×OE → R≥0. Then
∆(e|ψ)≥ 0 for all ψ with P [Φ∼ψ] > 0 and all e∈ E if and only if for all policies π andπ′,
favg(π)≤favg(π′@π).
7. Technically, if under any realization φ policyπ2 selects an item that π1 previously selected, then π1@π2 cannot be
written as a function from a set of partial realizations to E, i.e., it is not a policy. This can be amended by allowing
partial realizations to be multisets over elements of E×O, so that, e.g., if e is played twice then (e,ψ (e)) appears
twice inψ. However, in the interest of readability we will avoid this more cumbersome multiset formalism, and abuse
notation slightly by calling π1@π2 a policy. This issue arises whenever we run some policy and then run another
from a fresh start.
469

GOLOVIN & KRAUSE
Proof. Fix policiesπ andπ′. We begin by proving favg(π′@π) = favg(π@π′). Fix any φ and note
thatE(π′@π,φ ) =E(π′,φ )∪E(π,φ ) =E(π@π′,φ ). Hence
favg(π′@π) = E
[
f(E(π′@π, Φ), Φ)
]
= E
[
f(E(π@π′, Φ), Φ)
]
=favg(π@π′).
Thereforefavg(π)≤favg(π′@π) holds if and only iffavg(π)≤favg(π@π′).
We ﬁrst prove the forward direction. Suppose ∆(e|ψ)≥ 0 for all ψ and all e∈ E. Note the
expressionfavg(π@π′)−favg(π) can be written as a conical combination of (nonnegative)∆(e|ψ)
terms, i.e., for some α≥ 0,favg(π@π′)−favg(π) = ∑
ψ,eα(ψ,e) ∆(e|ψ). Hence favg(π@π′)−
favg(π)≥ 0 and sofavg(π)≤favg(π@π′) =favg(π′@π).
We next prove the backward direction, in contrapositive form. Suppose ∆(e|ψ)< 0 for some
ψ with P [Φ∼ψ] > 0 ande∈ E. Let e1,...,e r be the items in dom(ψ) and deﬁne policies π
andπ′ as follows. For i = 1, 2,...,r , both π andπ′ selectei and observe Φ(ei). If either policy
observes Φ(ei)⁄=ψ(ei) it immediately terminates, otherwise it continues. Ifπ succeeds in selecting
all of dom(ψ) then it terminates. Ifπ′ succeeds in selecting all of dom(ψ) then it selectse and then
terminates. We claimfavg(π@π′)−favg(π)< 0. Note that E(π@π′,φ ) = E(π,φ ) unlessφ∼ψ,
and ifφ∼ψ thenE(π@π′,φ ) =E(π,φ )∪{e} and alsoE(π,φ ) = dom(ψ). Hence
favg(π@π′)−favg(π) = E
[
f(E(π@π′, Φ), Φ)−f(E(π, Φ), Φ)
]
= E
[
f(E(π@π′, Φ), Φ)−f(E(π, Φ), Φ)| Φ∼ψ
]
· P [Φ∼ψ]
= E [f(dom(ψ)∪{e}, Φ)−f(dom(ψ), Φ)| Φ∼ψ]· P [Φ∼ψ]
= ∆( e|ψ)· P [Φ∼ψ]
The last term is negative, as P [Φ∼ψ]> 0 and ∆(e|ψ)< 0 by assumption. Therefore favg(π)>
favg(π@π′) =favg(π′@π), which completes the proof.
A.2 Adaptive Data Dependent Bounds with Costs
The adaptive data dependent bound has the following generalization with costs.
Lemma A.9 (The Adaptive Data Dependent Bound with Costs) . Suppose we have made observa-
tions ψ after selecting dom(ψ). Let π∗ be any policy. Then for adaptive monotone submodular
f : 2E×OE→ R≥0
∆(π∗|ψ) ≤ Z ≤ c (π∗|ψ) max
e
(∆(e|ψ)
c(e)
)
(A.1)
whereZ = maxw
{∑
e∈Ewe ∆(e|ψ) : ∑
ec(e)we≤c (π∗|ψ) and∀e∈E, 0≤we≤ 1
}
.
Proof. Order the items in dom(ψ) arbitrarily, and consider the policyπ that for eache∈ dom(ψ)
in order selects e, terminating if Φ(e)⁄= ψ(e) and proceeding otherwise, and, should it succeed
in selecting all of dom(ψ) without terminating (which occurs iff Φ∼ ψ), then proceeds to run π∗
as if from a fresh start, forgetting the observations in ψ. By construction the expected marginal
beneﬁt of running the π∗ portion of π conditioned on Φ∼ ψ equals ∆(π∗|ψ). For all e∈ E, let
w(e) = P [e∈E(π, Φ) | Φ∼ψ] be the probability thate is selected when runningπ, conditioned
on Φ ∼ ψ. Whenever some e ∈ E\ dom(ψ) is selected by π, the current partial realization
ψ′ containsψ as a subrealization; hence adaptive submodularity implies ∆(e|ψ′)≤ ∆(e|ψ). It
470

ADAPTIVE SUBMODULARITY : T HEORY AND APPLICATIONS
follows that the total contribution ofe to ∆(π∗|ψ) is upper bounded byw(e)· ∆(e|ψ). Summing
overe∈ E\ dom(ψ), we get a bound of ∆(π∗|ψ)≤ ∑
e∈E\dom(ψ)w(e)∆(e|ψ). Next, note
that each e∈ E\ dom(ψ) contributesw(e)c(e) cost to c (π∗|ψ). Hence it must be the case that∑
e∈E\dom(ψ)w(e)c(e)≤c (π∗|ψ). Obviously,w(e)∈ [0, 1] for alle, sincew(e) is a probability.
Hence ∆(π∗|ψ)≤∑
e∈E\dom(ψ)w(e)∆(e|ψ)≤Z because settingwe =w(e) is feasible for the
the linear program for whichZ is the optimal value.
To showZ ≤ c (π∗|ψ) maxe (∆(e|ψ)/c(e)), consider any feasible solution w to the linear
program deﬁningZ. It attains objective value
∑
e∈E
we ∆(e|ψ)≤
∑
e∈E
wec(e)∆(e|ψ)
c(e) ≤
∑
e∈E
wec(e) max
e∈E
(∆(e|ψ)
c(e)
)
≤c (π∗|ψ) max
e∈E
(∆(e|ψ)
c(e)
)
since∑
e∈Ewec(e)≤c (π∗|ψ) by the feasibility ofw.
A simple greedy algorithm can be used to compute Z; we provide pseudocode for it in Al-
gorithm 3. The correctness of this algorithm is more readily discerned upon rewriting the linear
program using variablesxe =c(e)we to obtain
Z = max
x
{∑
e∈E
xe (∆(e|ψ)/c(e)) :
∑
e
xe≤c (π∗|ψ) and∀e∈E, 0≤xe≤c(e)
}
.
Intuitively, it is clear that to optimize x we should shift mass towards variables with the highest
∆(e|ψ)/c(e) ratio. Clearly, any optimal solution has ∑
exe = c (π∗|ψ). Moreover, in any op-
timal solution, ∆(e|ψ)/c(e) > ∆(e′|ψ)/c(e′) implies xe = c(e) or xe′ = 0 , since otherwise
it would be possible to shift mass from xe′ toxe and obtain an increase in objective value. If the
∆(e|ψ)/c(e) values are distinct for distinct items, there will be a unique solution satisfying these
constraints, which Algorithm 3 will compute. Otherwise, we imagine perturbing each ∆(e|ψ) by
independent random quantitiesϵe drawn uniformly from [0,ϵ ] to make them distinct. This changes
the optimum value by at most |E|ϵ, which vanishes as we let ϵ tend towards zero. Hence any so-
lution satisfying ∑
exe = c (π∗|ψ) and ∆(e|ψ)/c(e) > ∆(e′|ψ)/c(e′) implies xe = c(e) or
xe′ = 0 is optimal. Since Algorithm 3 outputs the value of such a solution, it is correct.
A.3 The Max-Cover Objective
With item costs, the Adaptive Stochastic Maximization problem becomes one of ﬁnding some
π∗∈ arg max
π
favg(π[k]) (A.2)
wherek is a budget on the cost of selected items, and we deﬁnefavg(π) for a randomized policyπ to
befavg(π) := E [f(E(π, Φ), Φ)] as before, where the expectation is now over both Φ and the inter-
nal randomness ofπ which determinesE(π,φ ) for eachφ. We prove the following generalization
of Theorem 5.2.
Theorem A.10. Fix anyα≥ 1 and item costsc :E→ N. If f is adaptive monotone and adaptive
submodular with respect to the distributionp (φ), andπ is anα-approximate greedy policy, then for
all policiesπ∗ and positive integers𝓁 andk
favg(π[𝓁])>
(
1−e−𝓁/αk
)
favg(π∗
[k]).
471

GOLOVIN & KRAUSE
Input: GroundsetE; Partial realizationψ; Costsc :E→ N; BudgetC =c (π∗|ψ);
Conditional expected marginal beneﬁts ∆(e|ψ) for alle∈E.
Output: Z =
maxw
{∑
e∈Ewe ∆(e|ψ) : ∑
ec(e)we≤c (π∗|ψ) and∀e∈E, 0≤we≤ 1
}
begin
SortE by ∆(e|ψ)/c(e), so that ∆(e1|ψ)
c(e1) ≥ ∆(e2|ψ)
c(e2) ≥... ≥ ∆(en|ψ)
c(en) ;
Setw← 0;i← 0;a← 0;z← 0;e← NULL ;
whilea<C do
i←i + 1; e←ei;
we← min{1,C−a};
a←a +c(e)we; z←z +we∆(e|ψ);
Outputz;
end
Algorithm 3: Algorithm to compute the data dependent boundZ of Lemma A.9.
Proof. The proof goes along the lines of the performance analysis of the greedy algorithm for
maximizing a submodular function subject to a cardinality constraint of Nemhauser et al. (1978).
An extension of that analysis to α-approximate greedy algorithms, which is analogous to ours but
for the nonadaptive case, is shown by Goundan and Schulz (2007). For brevity, we will assume
without loss of generality thatπ =π[𝓁] andπ∗ =π∗
[k]. Then for alli, 0≤i<𝓁
favg(π∗) ≤ favg(π[i]@π∗) ≤ favg(π[i]) +αk
(
favg(π[i+1])−favg(π[i])
)
. (A.3)
The ﬁrst inequality is due to the adaptive monotonicity of f and Lemma A.8, from which we may
inferfavg(π2)≤favg(π1@π2) for anyπ1 andπ2. The second inequality may be obtained as a corol-
lary of Lemma A.9 as follows. Fix any partial realizationψ of the form
{
(e,φ (e)) :e∈E(π[i],φ )
}
for some φ. Consider ∆(π∗|ψ), which equals the expected marginal beneﬁt of the π∗ portion of
π[i]@π∗ conditioned on Φ∼ψ. Lemma A.9 allows us to bound it as
E [∆(π∗|ψ)] ≤ E [c (π∗|ψ)]· max
e
(∆(e|ψ)/c(e)),
where the expectations are taken over the internal randomness ofπ∗, if there is any. Note that since
π∗ has the formπ′
[k] for someπ′ we know that for allφ, E [c(E(π∗,φ ))]≤k, where the expectation
is again taken over the internal randomness of π∗. Hence E [c (π∗|ψ)]≤ k for all ψ. It follows
that E [∆(π∗|ψ)]≤ k· maxe (∆(e|ψ)/c(e)). By deﬁnition of an α-approximate greedy policy,
π obtains at least (1/α) maxe (∆(e|ψ)/c(e))≥ E [∆(π∗|ψ)]/αk expected marginal beneﬁt per
unit cost in a step immediately following its observation of ψ. Next we take an appropriate con-
vex combination of the previous inequality with different values of ψ. Let Ψ be a random partial
realization distributed aspΨ(ψ) := P
[
Ψ =ψ|∃φ.ψ =
{
(e,φ (e)) :e∈E(π[i],φ )
}]
Then
favg(π[i+1])−favg(π[i]) ≥ E
[ 1
α max
e
(∆(e|Ψ)
c(e)
)]
≥ E
[ E [∆(π∗|Ψ)]
αk
]
= favg(π[i]@π∗)−favg(π[i])
αk
472

ADAPTIVE SUBMODULARITY : T HEORY AND APPLICATIONS
A simple rearrangement of terms then yields the second inequality in (A.3).
Now deﬁne ∆i := favg(π∗)−favg(π[i]), so that (A.3) implies ∆i≤ αk(∆i− ∆i+1), from
which we infer ∆i+1≤
(
1− 1
αk
)
∆i and hence ∆𝓁≤
(
1− 1
αk
)𝓁 ∆0 < e−𝓁/αk∆0, where for this
last inequality we have used the fact that 1−x<e −x for allx> 0. Thus favg(π∗)−favg(π[𝓁])<
e−𝓁/αk(
favg(π∗)−favg(π[0])
)
≤e−𝓁/αkfavg(π∗) sofavg(π)> (1−e−𝓁/αk)favg(π∗).
A.4 The Min-Cost-Cover Objective
In this section, we provide arbitrary item cost generalizations of Theorem 5.8 and Theorem 5.9.
With item costs the Adaptive Stochastic Minimum Cost Cover problem becomes one of ﬁnding, for
some quota on utilityQ,
π∗∈ arg min
π
cavg(π) such thatf(E(π,φ ),φ )≥Q for allφ, (A.4)
wherecavg(π) := E [c(E(π, Φ))]. Without loss of generality, we may take a truncated version off,
namely (A,φ )↦→ min{Q,f (A,φ )}, and rephrase Problem (A.4) as ﬁnding
π∗∈ arg min
π
cavg(π) such thatπ coversφ for allφ. (A.5)
Hereby, recall that π coversφ if E [f(E(π,φ ),φ )] = f(E,φ ), where the expectation is over any
internal randomness ofπ. We will consider only Problem (A.5) for the remainder. We also consider
the worst-case variant of this problem, where we replace the expected cost cavg(π) objective with
the worst-case costcwc(π) := maxφc(E(π,φ )).
The deﬁnition of coverage (Deﬁnition 5.4 in§5.2 on page 441) requires no modiﬁcation to han-
dle item costs. Note, however, that coverage is all-or-nothing in the sense that covering a realization
φ with probability less than one does not count as covering it. A corollary of this is that only items
whose runs have ﬁnished help with coverage, whereas currently running items do not. For a simple
example, consider the case where E ={e}, c(e) = 2 , f(A,φ ) = |A|, and policy π that selects
e and then terminates. Then π[1] is a randomized policy which is π with probability 1
2, and is the
empty policy with probability 1
2, so E [f(E(π,φ ),φ )] = 1
2 < 1 =f(E,φ ) for eachφ. Hence, even
though half the timeπ[1] covers all realizations, it is counted as not covering any.
We begin with the approximation guarantee for the average-case policy cost with arbitrary item
costs.
Theorem A.11. Suppose f : 2E×OE → R≥0 is adaptive submodular and strongly adaptive
monotone with respect to p (φ) and there exists Q such that f(E,φ ) = Q for all φ. Let η be any
value such that f(S,φ ) > Q−η implies f(S,φ ) = Q for all S and φ. Let δ = minφp (φ) be
the minimum probability of any realization. Let π∗
avg be an optimal policy minimizing the expected
number of items selected to guarantee every realization is covered. Let π be an α-approximate
greedy policy with respect to the item costs. Then in general
cavg(π)≤αc avg(π∗
avg)
(
ln
(Q
δη
)
+ 1
)
473

GOLOVIN & KRAUSE
and for self–certifying instances
cavg(π)≤αc avg(π∗
avg)
(
ln
(Q
η
)
+ 1
)
.
Note that if range(f)⊂ Z, then η = 1 is a valid choice, so for general and self–certifying in-
stances we have cavg(π)≤ αc avg(π∗
avg) (ln(Q/δ) + 1) and cavg(π)≤ αc avg(π∗
avg) (ln(Q) + 1),
respectively.
Proof. Consider runningα-approximate greedy policyπ to completion, i.e., until it covers the true
realization. It starts off with v0 := E [f(∅, Φ)]≥ 0 reward in expectation, and terminates with Q
reward. Along the way it will go through some sequence of partial realizations specifying its current
observations,ψ0⊂ ψ1⊂···⊂ ψ𝓁, such that dom(ψi)\ dom(ψi−1) consists precisely of the ith
item selected byπ. We call this sequence thetraceτ =τ(φ) ofπ. For a realizationφ andx∈ R≥0,
we deﬁneψ (φ,x ) as the partial realization seen byπ just before it achievedx reward in expectation
underφ. Formally,
ψ (φ,x )∈ arg max{| dom(ψ)| : ψ∈τ(φ), E [f(dom(ψ), Φ)| Φ∼ψ]<x}. (A.6)
Note thatψ (φ,x ) exists for allx∈ (v0,Q ], and when it exists it is unique since no two elements of
the trace have equally large domains. Also note that by the strong adaptive monotonicity of f, the
functioni↦→ E [f(dom(ψi), Φ)| Φ∼ψi] must be nondecreasing for any traceψ0,ψ 1,...,ψ 𝓁.
Our overall strategy will be to bound the expected costcavg(π) ofπ by bounding the price it pays
per unit ofexpected rewardgained as it runs, and then integrating over the run. Note that Lemma A.9
tells us that maxe (∆(e|ψ)/c(e))≥ ∆
(
π∗
avg|ψ
)
/c
(
π∗
avg|ψ
)
for allψ. An α-approximate greedy
policy obtains at least 1/α of this rate. Hence we may bound its price, which we denote byθ, as
θ(ψ)≤αc
(
π∗
avg|ψ
)
/∆
(
π∗
avg|ψ
)
. (A.7)
Rather than try to bound the expected price asπ progresses in time, we will bound the expected
price as it progresses in the expected reward it obtains, measured as E [f(dom(ψ), Φ)| Φ∼ψ]
where ψ is the current partial realization. We next claim that ∆
(
π∗
avg|ψ (φ,x )
)
≥ Q−x for
allφ andx. Note that E [f(dom(ψ (φ,x )), Φ)| Φ∼ψ (φ,x )] < xby deﬁnition of ψ (φ,x ), and
f(E(π∗
avg,φ ),φ ) =Q for allφ sinceπ∗
avg covers every realization. SinceQ is the maximum possible
reward, if ∆
(
π∗
avg|ψ (φ,x )
)
< Q−x then we can generate a violation of strong adaptive mono-
tonicity by ﬁxing some φ′∼ ψ (φ,x ), selecting E(π∗
avg,φ′), and then selecting dom(ψ (φ,x )) to
reduce the expected reward. Thus ∆
(
π∗
avg|ψ (φ,x )
)
≥Q−x, and we infer
θ(ψ (φ,x )) ≤ αc
(
π∗
avg|ψ (φ,x )
)
∆
(
π∗avg|ψ (φ,x )
) ≤ αc
(
π∗
avg|ψ (φ,x )
)
Q−x . (A.8)
Next, we take an expectation over φ. Let θ(x) := E [θ(ψ (Φ,x ))]. Let ψx
1,...,ψ x
r be the possible
values ofψ (Φ,x ). Then because{{φ :φ∼ψx
i} :i = 1, 2,...,r } partitions the set of realizations,
E
[
c
(
π∗
avg|ψ (Φ,x )
)]
=
r∑
i=1
P [Φ∼ψx
i ]
∑
φ
p (φ|ψx
i )·c
(
π∗
avg|φ
)
(A.9)
=
∑
φ
p (φ)·c
(
π∗
avg|φ
)
(A.10)
= cavg(π∗
avg) (A.11)
474

ADAPTIVE SUBMODULARITY : T HEORY AND APPLICATIONS
It follows that
θ(x)≤ αc avg(π∗
avg)
Q−x . (A.12)
Letcavg(π,Q′) denote the expected cost to obtain expected rewardQ′. Then we can boundcavg(π,Q′)
as
cavg(π,Q′) =
∫ Q′
x=0
θ(x)dx ≤
∫ Q′
x=0
αc avg(π∗)
Q−x dx = αc avg(π∗) ln
( Q
Q−Q′
)
. (A.13)
We now use slightly different analyses for general instances and for self–certifying instances.
We begin with general instances. For these, we set Q′ =Q−δη and use a more reﬁned argument
to bound the cost of getting the remaining expected reward. Fix ψ∈ dom(π) and anyφ′∼ψ. We
sayψ coversφ′ ifπ coversφ′ by the time it observesψ. By deﬁnition of δ andη, if someφ′ is not
covered by ψ thenQ− E [f(dom(ψ), Φ)| Φ∼ψ]≥ δη. Hence the last item that π selects, say
upon observingψ, must increase its conditional expected value from E [f(dom(ψ), Φ)| Φ∼ψ]≤
Q−δη toQ. By Eq. (A.8), it follows that forx∈ [Q−δη,Q ],
θ(ψ (φ,x )) ≤ αc
(
π∗
avg|ψ (φ,x )
)
∆
(
π∗avg|ψ (φ,x )
) ≤ αc
(
π∗
avg|ψ (φ,x )
)
δη .
As before, we may take the expectation over φ to obtainθ(x)≤ αc avg(π∗
avg)/δη for allx∈ [Q−
δη,Q ]. This fact together with Eq. (A.13) yield
cavg(π) ≡ cavg(π,Q ) = cavg(π,Q−δη) +
∫Q
x=Q−δη E [θ(x)]dx
≤ αc avg(π∗) ln (Q/δη) +
∫Q
x=Q−δη
αcavg(π∗)
δη dx
= αc avg(π∗) (ln (Q/δη) + 1)
which completes the proof for general instances.
For self–certifying instances we use a similar argument. For these instances we setQ′ =Q−η,
and argue that the last item that π selects must increase its conditional expected value from at
mostQ−η toQ. For suppose π currently observesψ, and has not achieved conditional value Q,
i.e., E [f(dom(ψ), Φ)| Φ∼ψ] < Q. Then some φ∼ ψ is uncovered. Since the instance is self–
certifying, everyφ withφ∼ψ then hasf(dom(ψ),φ )<f (E,φ ) =Q. By deﬁnition ofη, for each
φ withφ∼ψ we then havef(dom(ψ),φ )≤Q−η, which implies E [f(dom(ψ), Φ)| Φ∼ψ]≤
Q−η. Reasoning analogously as with general instances, we may derive from this that θ(x)≤
αc avg(π∗
avg)/η for all x∈ [Q−η,Q ]. Computing cavg(π) = cavg(π,Q′) +
∫Q
x=Q′ E [θ(x)]dx as
before gives us the claimed approximation ratio for self–certifying instances, and completes the
proof.
Next we consider the worst-case cost. We generalize Theorem 5.9 by incorporating arbitrary item
costs.
Theorem A.12. Supposef : 2E×OE→ R≥0 is adaptive monotone and adaptive submodular with
respect top (φ), and letη be any value such thatf(S,φ )>f (E,φ )−η impliesf(S,φ ) =f(E,φ )
for all S and φ. Let δ = minφp (φ) be the minimum probability of any realization. Let π∗
wc be
the optimal policy minimizing the worst-case cost cwc(·) while guaranteeing that every realization
475

GOLOVIN & KRAUSE
is covered. Let π be an α-approximate greedy policy with respect to the item costs. Finally, let
Q := E [f(E, Φ)] be the maximum possible expected reward. Then
cwc(π)≤αc wc(π∗
wc)
(
ln
(Q
δη
)
+ 1
)
.
Proof. Let π be an α-approximate greedy policy. Let k = cwc(π∗
wc), let 𝓁 = αk ln (Q/δη), and
apply Theorem A.10 with these parameters to yield
favg(π[𝓁]) >
(
1−e−𝓁/αk
)
favg(π∗
wc) =
(
1− δη
Q
)
favg(π∗
wc). (A.14)
Sinceπ∗
wc covers every realization by assumption, favg(π∗
wc) = E [f(E, Φ)] = Q, so rearranging
terms of Eq. (A.14) yields Q−favg(π[𝓁]) < δη. Since favg(π[𝓁])≤ favg(π[𝓁→]) by the adaptive
monotonicity off, it follows thatQ−favg(π[𝓁→])<δη . By deﬁnition of δ andη, if someφ is not
covered byπ[𝓁→] thenQ−favg(π[𝓁→])≥δη. ThusQ−favg(π[𝓁→])<δη impliesQ−favg(π[𝓁→]) =
0, meaningπ[𝓁→] covers every realization.
We next claim that π[𝓁→] has worst-case cost at most 𝓁 +αk. It is sufﬁcient to show that the
ﬁnal item executed byπ[𝓁→] has cost at mostαk for any realization. As we will prove, this follows
from the facts that π is anα-approximate greedy policy and π∗
wc covers every realization at cost at
mostk. The data dependent bound, Lemma A.9 on page 470, guarantees that
max
e
(∆(e|ψ)
c(e)
)
≥ ∆(π∗
wc|ψ)
c (π∗wc|ψ) ≥ ∆(π∗
wc|ψ)
k . (A.15)
Suppose ψ∈ dom(π). We would like to say that maxe ∆(e|ψ)≤ ∆(π∗
wc|ψ). Supposing this
is true, any item e with cost c(e) > αk must have ∆(e|ψ)/c(e) < ∆(π∗
wc|ψ)/αk, and hence
cannot be selected by any α-approximate greedy policy upon observing ψ by Eq. (A.15), and thus
the ﬁnal item executed by π[𝓁→] has cost at most αk for any realization. So we next show that
maxe ∆(e|ψ)≤ ∆(π∗
wc|ψ). Towards this end, note that Lemma A.13 implies
max
e
∆(e|ψ)≤ E [f(E, Φ)| Φ∼ψ]− E [f(dom(ψ), Φ)| Φ∼ψ]. (A.16)
and to prove maxe ∆(e|ψ)≤ ∆(π∗
wc|ψ) it sufﬁces to show
E [f(E, Φ)| Φ∼ψ]≤ E [f(E(π∗
wc, Φ)∪ dom(ψ), Φ)| Φ∼ψ]. (A.17)
Proving Eq. (A.17) is quite straightforward if f is strongly adaptive monotone. Given that f
is only adaptive monotone, it requires some additional effort. So ﬁx A⊂ E and let πA be a non-
adaptive policy that selects all items in A in some arbitrary order. Let P :={ψ : dom(ψ) =A}.
Apply Lemma A.13 withπ′ =πA@π∗
wc and anyψ∈P to obtain
E [f(E(π∗
wc, Φ)∪A, Φ)| Φ∼ψ]≤ E [f(E, Φ)| Φ∼ψ]. (A.18)
Note that∑
ψ∈P P [Φ∼ψ]· E [f(E(π∗
wc, Φ)∪A, Φ)| Φ∼ψ] = favg(πA@π∗
wc)≥ favg(π∗
wc) =
E [f(E, Φ)]. Since we know E [f(E, Φ)] =∑
ψ∈P P [Φ∼ψ]· E [f(E, Φ)| Φ∼ψ], an averaging
argument together with Eq. (A.18) then implies that for allψ∈P
E [f(E(π∗
wc, Φ)∪A, Φ)| Φ∼ψ] = E [f(E, Φ)| Φ∼ψ]. (A.19)
476

ADAPTIVE SUBMODULARITY : T HEORY AND APPLICATIONS
Since ψ was an arbitrary partial realization with dom(ψ) = A, and A ⊆ E was arbitrary,
ﬁx ψ∈ dom(π) and let A = dom(ψ). With these settings, Eq. (A.19) implies Eq. (A.17), and
thus maxe ∆(e|ψ)≤ ∆(π∗
wc|ψ), and thus an α-approximate greedy policy can never select an
item with cost exceeding αk, where k = cwc(π∗
wc). Hence cwc(π[𝓁→])−cwc(π[𝓁])≤ αk, and so
cwc(π[𝓁→])≤𝓁 +αk. This completes the proof.
Lemma A.13. Fix adaptive monotone submodular objective f. For any policy π and any ψ ∈
dom(π) we have
E [f(E(π, Φ), Φ) | Φ∼ψ]≤ E [f(E, Φ) | Φ∼ψ].
Proof. Augment π to a new policy π′ as follows. Run π to completion, and let ψ′ be the partial
realization consisting of all of the states it has observed. If ψ⊆ ψ′, then proceed to select all the
remaining items inE in any order. Otherwise, ifψ ⊈ψ′ then terminate. Then
E [f(E(π, Φ), Φ) | Φ∼ψ]≤ E
[
f(E(π′, Φ), Φ) | Φ∼ψ
]
= E [f(E, Φ) | Φ∼ψ] (A.20)
where the inequality is by repeated application of the adaptive monotonicity of f, and the equality
is by construction.
In§5.2 we described how the result of Feige (1998) implies that there is no polynomial time
(1−ϵ) ln (Q/η) approximation algorithm for self–certifying instances of Adaptive Stochastic Min
Cost Cover, unless NP⊆ DTIME(nO(log logn)). Here we show a related result for general instances.
Lemma A.14. For every constantϵ> 0, there is no (1−ϵ) ln (Q/δη) polynomial time approxima-
tion algorithm for general instances of Adaptive Stochastic Min Cost Cover, for either the average
case objectivecavg(·) or the worst-case objectivecwc(·), unless NP⊆ DTIME(nO(log logn)).
Proof. We offer a reduction from the Set Cover problem. Fix a Set Cover instance with ground
set U and sets {S1,S 2,...,S m} ⊆2U with unit-cost sets. Fix Q,η and δ such that 1/δ and
Q/η are positive integers, and Q
δη =|U|. Let E :={S1,S 2,...,S m}, and set the cost of each
item to one. Partition U into 1/δ disjoint, equally sized subsets U1,U 2,...,U 1/δ. Construct a
realization φi for each Ui. Let the set of states be O ={NULL}. Hence φi(e) = NULL for all
i and e, so that no knowledge of the true realization is revealed by selecting items. We use a
uniform distribution over realizations, i.e.,p (φi) =δ for alli. Finally, our objective isf(C,φi) :=
|∪ S∈C (S∩Ui)|, i.e., the number of elements in Ui that we cover with sets in C. Since |O| = 1,
every realization is consistent with every possible partial realization ψ. Hence for any ψ, we have
E [f(dom(ψ), Φ)| Φ∼ψ] = δ ˆf(dom(ψ)), where ˆf(C) =|∪ S∈C S| is the objective function of
the original set cover instance. Since ˆf is submodular,f is adaptive submodular. Likewise, since
ˆf is monotone, and|O| = 1,f is strongly adaptive monotone. Now, to cover any realization, we
must obtain the maximum possible value for all realizations, which means selecting a collection
of sets C such that ∪S∈CS = U. Conversely, any C such that ∪S∈CS = U clearly covers f.
Hence this instance of Adaptive Stochastic Min Cost Cover, with either the average case objective
cavg(·) or the worst-case objectivecwc(·), is equivalent to the original Set Cover instance. Therefore,
the result from Feige (1998) implies that there is no polynomial time algorithm for obtaining a
(1−ϵ) ln|U| = (1−ϵ) ln (Q/δη) approximation for Adaptive Stochastic Min Cost Cover unless
NP⊆ DTIME(nO(log logn)).
477

GOLOVIN & KRAUSE
A.5 The Min-Sum Objective
In this section we prove Theorem 5.10, which appears on page 445, in the case where the items have
arbitrary costs. Our proof resembles the analogous proof of Streeter and Golovin (2007) for the
non-adaptive min-sum submodular cover problem, and, like that proof, ultimately derives from an
extremely elegant performance analysis of the greedy algorithm for min-sum set cover due to Feige
et al. (2004).
The objective function cΣ(·) generalized to arbitrary cost items uses the strict truncation 8 π[←t] in
place ofπ[t] in the unit-cost deﬁnition:
cΣ(π) :=
∞∑
t=0
(
E [f(E, Φ)]−favg(π[←t])
)
=
∑
φ
p (φ)
∞∑
t=0
(
f(E,φ )−f(E(π[←t],φ ),φ )
)
.
(A.21)
We will prove that any α-approximate greedy policy π achieves a 4α-approximation for the min-
sum objective, i.e., cΣ(π)≤ 4αc Σ(π∗) for all policies π∗. To do so, we require the following
lemma.
Lemma A.15. Fix an α-approximate greedy policy π for some adaptive monotone submodular
functionf and letsi :=α
(
favg(π[i+1])−favg(π[i])
)
. For any policyπ∗ and nonnegative integersi
andk, we havefavg(π∗
[k])≤favg(π[←i]) +k·si.
Proof. Fixπ,π∗,i , and k. By adaptive monotonicity favg(π∗
[k])≤ favg(π[←i]@π∗
[k]). We next aim
to prove
favg(π[←i]@π∗
[k])≤favg(π[←i]) +k·si (A.22)
which is sufﬁcient to complete the proof. Towards this end, ﬁx a partial realization ψ of the
form
{
(e,φ (e)) :e∈E(π[←i],φ )
}
for some φ. Consider ∆
(
π∗
[k]|ψ
)
, which equals the expected
marginal beneﬁt of the π∗
[k] portion ofπ[←i]@π∗
[k] conditioned on Φ∼ψ. Lemma A.9 allows us to
bound it as
E
[
∆
(
π∗
[k]|ψ
)]
≤ E
[
c
(
π∗
[k]|ψ
)]
· max
e
(∆(e|ψ)
c(e)
)
,
where the expectations are taken over the internal randomness of π∗, if there is any. Note that
for all φ, we have E
[
c(E(π∗
[k],φ ))
]
≤ k, where the expectation is again taken over the internal
randomness of π∗
[k]. Hence E
[
c
(
π∗
[k]|ψ
)]
≤ k for all ψ. It follows that E
[
∆
(
π∗
[k]|ψ
)]
≤
k· maxe (∆(e|ψ)/c(e)). By deﬁnition of an α-approximate greedy policy,π obtains at least
(1/α) max
e
(∆(e|ψ)/c(e))≥ E
[
∆
(
π∗
[k]|ψ
)]
/αk (A.23)
expected marginal beneﬁt per unit cost in a step immediately following its observation of ψ. Next
we take an appropriate convex combination of the previous inequality with different values of ψ.
Let Ψ be a random partial realization distributed as
{
(e, Φ(e)) :e∈E(π[←i], Φ)
}
. Then taking the
8. See Deﬁnition A.2 on page 469.
478

ADAPTIVE SUBMODULARITY : T HEORY AND APPLICATIONS
Figure 6: An illustration of the inequality
∫∞
x=0h(x)dx≥∑
i≥0xi (yi−yi+1).
expectation of Eq. (A.23) over Ψ yields
favg(π[i+1])−favg(π[i])≥ Eψ


E
[
∆
(
π∗
[k]|Ψ
)]
αk

 =
favg(π[←i]@π∗
[k])−favg(π[←i])
αk . (A.24)
Multiplying Eq. (A.24) by αk, and substituting in si = α
(
favg(π[i+1])−favg(π[i])
)
, we conclude
ksi≥favg(π[←i]@π∗
[k])−favg(π[←i]) which immediately yields Eq. (A.22) and concludes the proof.
Using Lemma A.15, together with a geometric argument developed by Feige et al. (2004), we now
prove Theorem 5.10.
Proof of Theorem 5.10: LetQ := E [f(E, Φ)] be the maximum possible expected reward, where
the expectation is taken w.r.t. p (φ). Let π be an α-approximate greedy policy. Deﬁne Ri :=
Q−favg
(
π[i]
)
and deﬁne Pi := Q−favg
(
π[←i]
)
. Let xi := Pi
2si
, let yi := Ri
2 , and let h(x) :=
Q−favg(π∗
[x]). We claim favg
(
π[←i]
)
≤ favg
(
π[i]
)
and soPi≥ Ri. This clearly holds if π[←i] is
the empty policy, and otherwiseπ can always select an item that contributes zero marginal beneﬁt,
namely an item it has already played previously. Hence an α-approximate greedy policy π can
never select items with negative expected marginal beneﬁt, and so favg
(
π[←i]
)
≤ favg
(
π[i]
)
. By
Lemma A.15,favg
(
π∗
[xi]
)
≤favg
(
π[←i]
)
+xisi. Therefore
h(xi)≥Q−favg(π[←i])−xi·si =Pi− Pi
2 ≥ Ri
2 =yi (A.25)
For similar reasons that favg
(
π[←i]
)
≤ favg
(
π[i]
)
, we have favg
(
π[i−1]
)
≤ favg
(
π[i]
)
, and so
the sequence⟨y1,y 2,... ⟩ is non-increasing. The adaptive monotonicity and adaptive submodular-
ity of f imply that h(x) is non-increasing. Informally, this is because otherwise, if favg(π∗
[x]) >
favg(π∗
[x+1]) for some x, then the optimal policy must be sacriﬁcing immediate rewards at time x
in exchange for greater returns later, and it can be shown that if such a strategy is optimal, then
adaptive submodularity cannot hold. Eq. (A.25) and the monotonicity of h andi↦→ yi imply that∫∞
x=0h(x)dx≥∑
i≥0xi (yi−yi+1) (see Figure 6). The left hand side is a lower bound forcΣ(π∗),
and becausesi =α (Ri−Ri+1) the right hand side simpliﬁes to 1
4α
∑
i≥0Pi = 1
4αcΣ(π), proving
cΣ(π)≤ 4α·cΣ(π∗).
479

GOLOVIN & KRAUSE
A.6 A Symbol Table
E,e∈E Ground set of items, and an individual item.
O,o∈O States an item may be in, or outcomes of selecting an item, and an individual
state/outcome.
φ A realization, i.e., a function from items to states.
ψ A partial realization, typically encoding the current set of observations;
eachψ⊂E×O is a partial mapping from items to states.
Φ, Ψ A random realization and a random partial realization, respectively.
∼ The consistency relation:φ∼ψ meansψ(e) =φ(e) for alle∈ dom(ψ).
p The probability distribution on realizations.
p(φ|ψ) The conditional distribution on realizations:p(φ|ψ) := P [Φ =φ| Φ∼ψ].
π A policy, which maps partial realizations to items.
E(π,φ ) The set of all items selected byπ when run under realizationφ.
∆(e|ψ) The conditional expected marginal beneﬁt ofe conditioned onψ:
∆(e|ψ) := E [f(dom(ψ)∪{e}, Φ)−f(dom(ψ), Φ)| Φ∼ψ].
∆(π|ψ) The conditional expected marginal beneﬁt of policyπ conditioned onψ:
∆(π|ψ) := E [f(dom(ψ)∪E(π, Φ), Φ)−f(dom(ψ), Φ)| Φ∼ψ].
ψ[e/o] Shorthand forψ∪{ (e,o )}.
k Budget on the cost of selected item sets.
π[k] A truncated policy. See Deﬁnition 5.1 on page 439 (unit costs) and Deﬁnition A.4
on page 469.
π[←k] A strictly truncated policy. See Deﬁnition A.2 on page 469.
π[k→] A laxly truncated policy. See Deﬁnition A.3 on page 469.
π@π′ Policiesπ andπ′ concatenated together. See Deﬁnition A.6 on page 469.
f An objective function, of typef : 2E×OE→ R≥0 unless stated otherwise.
favg Average beneﬁt:favg(π) := E [f(E(π, Φ), Φ)].
c Item costsc :E→ N. Extended to sets viac(S) :=∑
e∈Sc(e).
cavg Average cost of a policy:cavg(π) := E [c(E(π, Φ))].
cwc Worst-case cost of a policy:cwc(π) := maxφc(E(π,φ )).
cΣ Min-sum cost of a policy:cΣ(π) :=∑∞
t=0
(
E [f(E, Φ)]−favg(π[←t])
)
.
c (π|ψ) Conditional average policy cost:c (π|ψ) := E [c(E(π, Φ))| Φ∼ψ].
α Approximation factor for greedy optimization in anα-approximate greedy policy.
Q Beneﬁt quota. Often Q = E [f(E, Φ)].
η Coverage gap:η = sup{η′ :f(S,φ )>Q −η′ impliesf(S,φ )≥Q for allS,φ}.
1P The indicator for propositionP , which equals one ifP is true and zero ifP is false.
Table 2: Important symbols and notations used in this article
480

ADAPTIVE SUBMODULARITY : T HEORY AND APPLICATIONS
A.7 Proof of Approximation Hardness in the Absence of Adaptive Submodularity
We now provide the proof of Theorem 12.1 whose statement appears on page 464 in§12.
Proof of Theorem 12.1:We construct a hard instance based on the following intuition. We make the
algorithm go “treasure hunting”. There is a set of t locations{0, 1,,...,t − 1}, there is a treasure
at one of these locations, and the algorithm gets unit reward if it ﬁnds it, and zero reward otherwise.
There are m “maps,” each consisting of a cluster of s bits, and each purporting to indicate where
the treasure is, and each map is stored in a (weak) secret-sharing way, so that querying few bits of
a map reveals nothing about where it says the treasure is. Moreover, all but one of the maps are
fake, and there is a puzzle indicating which map is the correct one indicating the treasure’s location.
Formally, a fake map is one which is probabilistically independent of the location of the treasure,
conditioned on the puzzle.
Our instance will have three types of items, E = ET⨄EM⨄EP , where|ET| = t encodes
where the treasure is, |EM| = ms encodes the maps, and |EP| = n3 encodes the puzzle, where
m,t,s and n are speciﬁed below. All outcomes are binary, so that O ={0, 1}, and we identify
items with bit indices. Accordingly we say that φ(e) is the value of bit e. For all e∈ EM∪EP ,
P [Φ(e) = 1] = .5 independently. The conditional distribution of Φ(ET ) given Φ(EM∪EP ) will
be deterministic as speciﬁed below. Our objective functionf is linear, and deﬁned as follows:
f(A,φ ) =|{e∈A∩ET :φ(e) = 1}|.
We now describe the puzzle, which is to computei(P ) := (perm(P ) mod p) mod 2 𝓁 for a suit-
able random matrix P , and suitable prime p and integer𝓁, where perm(P ) =∑
σ∈Sn
∏n
i=1Piσ(i)
is the permanent ofP . We exploit Theorem 1.9 of Feige and Lund (1997) in which they show that
if there exist constants η,δ > 0 such that a randomized polynomial time algorithm can compute
(perm(P ) mod p) mod 2 𝓁 correctly with probability2−𝓁(1+1/nη), whereP is drawn uniformly
at random from{0, 1, 2,...,p − 1}n×n,p is any prime superpolynomial in n, and 𝓁≤ p
( 1
2−δ
)
,
then PH = AM = ΣP
2 . To encode the puzzle, we ﬁx a primep∈ [2n−2, 2n−1] and use then3 bits of
φ(EP ) to sampleP =P (φ) (nearly) uniformly at random from{0, 1, 2,...,p − 1}n×n as follows.
For a matrix P ∈ Zn×n, we let rep(P ) := ∑
ijPij·p(i−1)n+(j−1) deﬁne a base p representation
ofP . Note rep(·) is one-to-one for n×n matrices with entries in Zp, so we can deﬁne its inverse
rep−1(·). The encodingP (φ) interprets the bitsφ(EP ) as an integerx in [2n3
], and computesy =x
mod (pn2
). If x≤
⌊
2n3
/pn2
⌋
pn2
, thenP = rep−1(y). Otherwise, P is the all zero matrix. This
latter event occurs with probability at most pn2
/2n3
≤ 2−n2
, and in this case we simply suppose
the algorithm under consideration ﬁnds the treasure and so gets unit reward. This adds 2−n2
to its
expected reward. So let us assume from now on thatP is drawn uniformly at random.
Next we consider the maps. Partition EM =⨄m
i=1Mi intom mapsMi, each consisting of s
items. For each map Mi, partition its items into s/ log2t groups of log2t bits each, so that the bits
of each group encode a log2t bit binary string. Let vi∈{ 0, 1,...,t − 1} be the XOR of these
s/ log2t binary strings, interpreted as an integer (using any ﬁxed encoding). We say Mi points to
vi as the location of the treasure. A priori, each vi is uniformly distributed in {0,...,t − 1}. For
a particular realization of φ(EP∪EM), deﬁne v(φ) := vi(P (φ)). We set v(φ) to be the location
of the treasure under realization φ, i.e., we label ET ={e0,e 1,...,e t−1} and ensureφ(ej) = 1 if
j =vi(P (φ)), andφ(e) = 0 for all othere∈ET . Note the random variable v =v(φ) is distributed
uniformly at random in{0, 1,...,t −1}. Note that this still holds if we condition on the realizations
481

GOLOVIN & KRAUSE
of any set ofs/ log2t− 1 items in a map, because in this case there is still at least one group whose
bits remain completely unobserved.
Now consider the optimal policy with a budget of k = n3 +s + 1 items to pick. Clearly, its
reward can be at most 1. However, given a budget ofk, a computationally unconstrained policy can
exhaustively sampleEP , solve the puzzle (i.e., compute i(P )), read the correct map (i.e., exhaus-
tively sampleMi(P )), decode the map (i.e., compute v =vi(P )), and get the treasure (i.e., pick ev)
thereby obtaining a reward of one.
Now we give an upper bound on the expected reward R of any randomized polynomial time
algorithmA with a budget of βk items, assuming ΣP
2 ⁄= PH. Fix a small constant γ >0, and set
s =n3 andm =t =n1/γ. We suppose we giveA the realizationsφ(EM) for free. We also replace
its budget of βk items with a budget of βk speciﬁcally for map items in EM and an additional
budget of βk speciﬁcally for the treasure locations in ET . Obviously, this can only help it. As
noted, if it selects less than s/ log2t bits from the map Mi(P ) indicated byP , the distribution over
vi(P ) conditioned on those realizations is still uniform. Of course, knowledge of vi fori⁄= i(P )
is useless for getting reward. Hence A can try at most βk log2(t)/s = o(βk) maps in an attempt
to ﬁnd Mi(P ). Note that if we have a randomized algorithm which given a random P drawn from
{0, 1, 2,...,p − 1}n×n always outputs a set S of integers of size α such that P [i(P )∈S]≥ q,
then we can use it to construct a randomized algorithm that, givenP , outputs an integerx such that
P [i(P ) =x]≥ q/α, simply by running the ﬁrst algorithm and then selecting a random item of S.
IfA does not ﬁndMi(P ), the distribution on the treasure’s location is uniform given its knowledge.
Hence it’s budget ofβk treasure locations can only earn it expected reward at most βk/t. Armed
with these observations and Theorem 1.9 in the work of Feige and Lund (1997) and our complexity
theoretic assumptions, we infer E [R]≤o(βk)· 2−𝓁(1 + 1/nη) +βk/t + 2−n2
. Since s =n3 and
m =t =n1/γ andγ = Θ(1) andη = 1 and𝓁 = log2m andk =n3 +s + 1 = 2n3 + 1, we have
E [R]≤ βk
t (1 +o(1)) = 2βn3−1/γ(1 +o(1)).
Next note that|E| = t +ms +n3 = n3+1/γ(1 +o(1)). Straightforward algebra shows that in
order to ensure E [R] = o(β/|E|1−ε), it sufﬁces to choose γ≤ ε/6. Thus, under our complexity
theoretic assumptions, any polynomial time randomized algorithm A with budget βk achieves at
mosto(β/|E|1−ε) of the value obtained by the optimal policy with budgetk, so the approximation
ratio isω(|E|1−ε/β).
References
Alon, N., Awerbuch, B., Azar, Y ., Buchbinder, N., & Naor, J. S. (2009). The online set cover
problem. SIAM Journal on Computing, 39, 361–370.
Arkin, E. M., Meijer, H., Mitchell, J. S. B., Rappaport, D., & Skiena, S. S. (1993). Decision trees for
geometric models. In Proceedings of Symposium on Computational Geometry, pp. 369–378,
New York, NY , USA. ACM.
Asadpour, A., Nazerzadeh, H., & Saberi, A. (2008). Stochastic submodular maximization. InWINE
’08: Proceedings of the 4th International Workshop on Internet and Network Economics, pp.
477–489, Berlin, Heidelberg. Springer-Verlag.
Bellala, G., & Scott, C. (2010). Modiﬁed group generalized binary search with near-optimal per-
formance guarantees. Tech. rep., University of Michigan.
482

ADAPTIVE SUBMODULARITY : T HEORY AND APPLICATIONS
Brochu, E., Cora, M., & de Freitas, N. (2009). A tutorial on Bayesian optimization of expensive cost
functions, with application to active user modeling and hierarchical reinforcement learning.
Tech. rep. TR-2009-23, Department of Computer Science, University of British Columbia.
Buchbinder, N., & Naor, J. S. (2009). The design of competitive online algorithms via a primal–dual
approach. Foundations and Trends in Theoretical Computer Science, 3, 93–263.
Chakaravarthy, V . T., Pandit, V ., Roy, S., Awasthi, P., & Mohania, M. (2007). Decision trees for
entity identiﬁcation: Approximation algorithms and hardness results. In Proceedings of the
ACM-SIGMOD Symposium on Principles of Database Systems.
Chan, C. W., & Farias, V . F. (2009). Stochastic depletion problems: Effective myopic policies for a
class of dynamic optimization problems. Mathematics of Operations Research, 34(2), 333–
350.
Cohn, D. A., Gharamani, Z., & Jordan, M. I. (1996). Active learning with statistical models.Journal
of Artiﬁcial Intelligence Research (JAIR), 4, 129–145.
Dantzig, G. B. (1955). Linear programming under uncertainty. Management Science, 1, 197–206.
Dasgupta, S. (2004). Analysis of a greedy active learning strategy. In NIPS: Advances in Neural
Information Processing Systems 17, pp. 337–344. MIT Press.
Dean, B., Goemans, M., & V ondr´ak, J. (2005). Adaptivity and approximation for stochastic packing
problems. In Proceedings of the 16th ACM-SIAM Symposium on Discrete Algorithms, , pp.
395–404.
Dean, B., Goemans, M., & V ondr´ak, J. (2008). Approximating the stochastic knapsack problem:
The beneﬁt of adaptivity. Mathematics of Operations Research, 33, 945–964.
Deshpande, A., Guestrin, C., Madden, S., Hellerstein, J., & Hong, W. (2004). Model-driven data
acquisition in sensor networks. In Proceedings of the International Conference on Very Large
Data Bases (VLDB), pp. 588–599.
Feige, U. (1998). A threshold of ln n for approximating set cover. Journal of the ACM, 45(4), 634
– 652.
Feige, U., Lov´asz, L., & Tetali, P. (2004). Approximating min sum set cover. Algorithmica, 40(4),
219–234.
Feige, U., & Lund, C. (1997). On the hardness of computing the permanent of random matrices.
Computational Complexity, 6(2), 101–132.
Fujishige, S. (2005). Submodular functions and optimization (2nd edition)., V ol. 58. Annals of
Discrete Mathematics, North Holland, Amsterdam.
Garey, M. R., & Graham, R. L. (1974). Performance bounds on the splitting algorithm for binary
testing. Acta Informatica, 3, 347–355.
Gittins, J. C., & Jones, D. M. (1979). A dynamic allocation index for the discounted multiarmed
bandit problem. Biometrika, 66(3), 561–565.
Goemans, M. X., & V ondr´ak, J. (2006). Stochastic covering and adaptivity. In Proceedings of 7th
International Latin American Symposium on Theoretical Informatics, pp. 532–543.
483

GOLOVIN & KRAUSE
Golovin, D., Gupta, A., Kumar, A., & Tangwongsan, K. (2008). All-norms and all- Lp-norms
approximation algorithms. In Hariharan, R., Mukund, M., & Vinay, V . (Eds.), IARCS An-
nual Conference on Foundations of Software Technology and Theoretical Computer Science
(FSTTCS 2008), Dagstuhl, Germany. Schloss Dagstuhl - Leibniz-Zentrum fuer Informatik,
Germany.
Golovin, D., & Krause, A. (2010). Adaptive submodularity: A new approach to active learning and
stochastic optimization. In 23rd Annual Conference on Learning Theory, pp. 333–345.
Golovin, D., & Krause, A. (2011). Adaptive submodular optimization under matroid constraints.
CoRR, abs/1101.4450.
Golovin, D., Krause, A., Gardner, B., Converse, S. J., & Morey, S. (2011). Dynamic resource
allocation in conservation planning. In AAAI ’11: Proceedings of the Twenty–Fifth AAAI
Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence, pp. 1331–1336. AAAI Press.
Golovin, D., Krause, A., & Ray, D. (2010). Near-optimal Bayesian active learning with noisy
observations. In NIPS: Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems 23, pp. 766–774.
Goundan, P. R., & Schulz, A. S. (2007). Revisiting the greedy approach to submodular set function
maximization. Tech. rep., Massachusetts Institute of Technology.
Gr¨unew¨alder, S., Audibert, J.-Y ., Opper, M., & Shawe-Taylor, J. (2010). Regret bounds for Gaussian
process bandit problems. In Proceedings of the 13th International Conference on Artiﬁcial
Intelligence and Statistics.
Guha, S., & Munagala, K. (2009). Multi-armed bandits with metric switching costs. InProceedings
of the International Colloquium on Automata, Languages and Programming (ICALP).
Guha, S., Munagala, K., & Shi, P. (2009). Approximation algorithms for restless bandit problems.
Tech. rep. 0711.3861v5, arXiv.
Guillory, A., & Bilmes, J. (2009). Average-case active learning with costs. InThe 20th International
Conference on Algorithmic Learning Theory, University of Porto, Portugal.
Guillory, A., & Bilmes, J. (2010). Interactive submodular set cover. In Proceedings of the Interna-
tional Conference on Machine Learning (ICML), No. UWEETR-2010-0001, Haifa, Israel.
Guillory, A., & Bilmes, J. A. (2011). Simultaneous learning and covering with adversarial noise. In
International Conference on Machine Learning (ICML), Bellevue, Washington.
Gupta, A., Krishnaswamy, R., Nagarajan, V ., & Ravi, R. (2010). Approximation algorithms for
optimal decision trees and adaptive TSP problems. In Proceedings of the International Col-
loquium on Automata, Languages and Programming (ICALP), V ol. 6198 ofLecture Notes in
Computer Science, pp. 690–701. Springer.
Gupta, A., P ´al, M., Ravi, R., & Sinha, A. (2005). What about Wednesday? Approximation algo-
rithms for multistage stochastic optimization. In Proceedings of the 8th International Work-
shop on Approximation Algorithms for Combinatorial Optimization Problems (APPROX).
Jones, D. R., Schonlau, M., & Welch, W. J. (1998). Efﬁcient global optimization of expensive
black-box functions. Journal of Global Optimization, 13, 455–492.
Kaplan, H., Kushilevitz, E., & Mansour, Y . (2005). Learning with attribute costs. InProceedings of
the 37th ACM Symposium on Theory of Computing, pp. 356–365.
484

ADAPTIVE SUBMODULARITY : T HEORY AND APPLICATIONS
Kempe, D., Kleinberg, J., & Tardos, E. (2003). Maximizing the spread of inﬂuence through a social
network. In KDD ’03: Proceedings of the ninth ACM SIGKDD international conference on
Knowledge discovery and data mining, pp. 137–146, New York, NY , USA. ACM.
Kosaraju, S. R., Przytycka, T. M., & Borgstrom, R. S. (1999). On an optimal split tree problem.
In Proceedings of the 6th International Workshop on Algorithms and Data Structures , pp.
157–168, London, UK. Springer-Verlag.
Krause, A., & Guestrin, C. (2005). Near-optimal nonmyopic value of information in graphical
models. In Proceedings of Uncertainty in Artiﬁcial Intelligence (UAI).
Krause, A., & Guestrin, C. (2007). Near-optimal observation selection using submodular functions.
In Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI) Nectar track, pp. 1650–1654.
Krause, A., & Guestrin, C. (2009a). Intelligent information gathering and submodular function
optimization. Tutorial at the International Joint Conference in Artiﬁcial Intelligence.
Krause, A., & Guestrin, C. (2009b). Optimal value of information in graphical models. Journal of
Artiﬁcial Intelligence Research (JAIR), 35, 557–591.
Leskovec, J., Krause, A., Guestrin, C., Faloutsos, C., VanBriesen, J., & Glance, N. (2007). Cost-
effective outbreak detection in networks. InKDD ’07: Proceedings of the 13th ACM SIGKDD
international conference on Knowledge discovery and data mining, pp. 420–429, New York,
NY , USA. ACM.
Littman, M., Goldsmith, J., & Mundhenk, M. (1998). The computational complexity of probabilistic
planning. Journal of Artiﬁcial Intelligence Research, 9, 1–36.
Liu, Z., Parthasarathy, S., Ranganathan, A., & Yang, H. (2008). Near-optimal algorithms for shared
ﬁlter evaluation in data stream systems. In SIGMOD ’08: Proceedings of the 2008 ACM
SIGMOD international conference on Management of data , pp. 133–146, New York, NY ,
USA. ACM.
Lizotte, D., Wang, T., Bowling, M., & Schuurmans, D. (2007). Automatic gait optimization with
Gaussian process regression. In Proceedings of the Twentieth International Joint Conference
on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (IJCAI), pp. 944–949.
Loveland, D. W. (1985). Performance bounds for binary testing with arbitrary weights. Acta Infor-
matica, 22(1), 101–114.
McCallum, A., & Nigam, K. (1998). Employing EM and pool-based active learning for text clas-
siﬁcation. In Proceedings of the International Conference on Machine Learning (ICML), pp.
350–358.
Minoux, M. (1978). Accelerated greedy algorithms for maximizing submodular set functions. In
Proceedings of the 8th IFIP Conference on Optimization Techniques, pp. 234–243. Springer.
Munagala, K., Babu, S., Motwani, R., Widom, J., & Thomas, E. (2005). The pipelined set cover
problem. In Proceedings of the Intl. Conf. on Database Theory, pp. 83–98.
Nemhauser, G. L., Wolsey, L. A., & Fisher, M. L. (1978). An analysis of approximations for maxi-
mizing submodular set functions - I. Mathematical Programming, 14(1), 265–294.
Nowak, R. (2009). Noisy generalized binary search. In NIPS: Advances in Neural Information
Processing Systems 22, pp. 1366–1374.
485

GOLOVIN & KRAUSE
Papadimitriou, C. H., & Tsitsiklis, J. N. (1987). The complexity of Markov decision processses.
Mathematics of Operations Research, 12(3), 441–450.
Pineau, J., Gordon, G., & Thrun, S. (2006). Anytime point-based approximations for large
POMDPs. Journal of Artiﬁcial Intelligence Research (JAIR), 27, 335–380.
Raz, R., & Safra, S. (1997). A sub-constant error–probability low–degree test, and a sub–constant
error-probability PCP characterization of NP. In STOC ’97: Proceedings of the twenty-ninth
annual ACM Symposium on Theory of Computing, pp. 475–484, New York, NY , USA. ACM.
Ross, S., Pineau, J., Paquet, S., & Chaib-draa, B. (2008). Online planning algorithms for POMDPs.
Journal of Artiﬁcial Intelligence Research, 32, 663–704.
Schrijver, A. (2003). Combinatorial optimization : polyhedra and efﬁciency . Volume B, Part IV,
Chapters 39-49. Springer.
Sebastiani, P., & Wynn, H. P. (2000). Maximum entropy sampling and optimal Bayesian experi-
mental design. Journal of the Royal Statistical Society, Series B, 62(1), 145–157.
Smallwood, R., & Sondik, E. (1973). The optimal control of partially observable Markov decision
processes over a ﬁnite horizon. Operations Research, 21, 1071–1088.
Srinivas, N., Krause, A., Kakade, S., & Seeger, M. (2010). Gaussian process optimization in the
bandit setting: No regret and experimental design. In Proceedings of the International Con-
ference on Machine Learning (ICML).
Streeter, M., & Golovin, D. (2007). An online algorithm for maximizing submodular functions.
Tech. rep. CMU-CS-07-171, Carnegie Mellon University.
Streeter, M., & Golovin, D. (2008). An online algorithm for maximizing submodular functions. In
NIPS: Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems 21, pp. 1577–1584.
Wolsey, L. A. (1982). An analysis of the greedy algorithm for the submodular set covering problem.
Combinatorica, 2(4), 385–393.
486