Adaptive Informative Path Planning Using
Deep Reinforcement Learning for UA V-based Active Sensing
Julius R ¨uckin, Liren Jin, Marija Popovi ´c
Abstract— Aerial robots are increasingly being utilized for
environmental monitoring and exploration. However, a key
challenge is efﬁciently planning paths to maximize the in-
formation value of acquired data as an initially unknown
environment is explored. To address this, we propose a new
approach for informative path planning based on deep rein-
forcement learning (RL). Combining recent advances in RL and
robotic applications, our method combines tree search with an
ofﬂine-learned neural network predicting informative sensing
actions. We introduce several components making our approach
applicable for robotic tasks with high-dimensional state and
large action spaces. By deploying the trained network during a
mission, our method enables sample-efﬁcient online replanning
on platforms with limited computational resources. Simulations
show that our approach performs on par with existing methods
while reducing runtime by 8−10×. We validate its performance
using real-world surface temperature data.
I. I NTRODUCTION
Recent years have seen an increasing usage of autonomous
robots in a variety of data collection applications, includ-
ing environmental monitoring [1–5], exploration [6], and
inspection [7]. In many tasks, these systems promise a more
ﬂexible, safe, and economic solution compared to traditional
manual or static sampling methods [4, 8]. However, to fully
exploit their potential, a key challenge is developing algo-
rithms for active sensing, where the objective is to plan paths
for efﬁcient data gathering subject to ﬁnite computational and
sensing resources, such as energy, time, or travel distance.
This paper examines the task of active sensing using an un-
manned aerial vehicle (UA V) in terrain monitoring scenarios.
Our goal is to map an a priori unknown nonhomogeneous 2D
scalar ﬁeld, e.g. of temperature, humidity, etc., on the terrain
using measurements taken by an on-board sensor. In similar
setups, most practical systems rely on precomputed paths for
data collection, e.g. coverage planning [7]. However, such
approaches assume a uniform distribution of measurement
information value in the environment and hence do not allow
for adaptivity, i.e. closely inspecting regions of interest, such
as hotspots [1, 2] or anomalies [9], as they are discovered.
Our motivation is to ﬁnd information-rich paths targeting
these areas by performing efﬁcient online adaptive replan-
ning on computationally constrained platforms.
Several informative path planning (IPP) approaches for
active sensing have been proposed [1–3, 8, 10], which enable
adjusting decision-making based on observed data. However,
This work was funded by the Deutsche Forschungsgemeinschaft (DFG,
German Research Foundation) under Germany’s Excellence Strategy -
EXC 2070 – 390732324. Authors are with the Cluster of Excellence
PhenoRob, Institute of Geodesy and Geoinformation, University of Bonn.
Corresponding: jrueckin@uni-bonn.de.
Fig. 1: Our RL-based IPP approach applied in a temperature
mapping scenario. (Left) Our simulation setup using real-world
ﬁeld temperature data. (Right) The temperature variable is projected
to the surface. Our approach adaptively plans a UA V’s path (evolv-
ing over time from blue to red) focusing on hotter regions (red).
scaling these methods to large problem spaces remains an
open challenge. The main computational bottleneck in IPP
is the predictive replanning step, since multiple future mea-
surements must be simulated when evaluating next candidate
actions. Previous studies have tackled this by discretizing
the action space, e.g. sparse graphs [10, 11]; however, such
simpliﬁcations sacriﬁce on the quality of predictive plans. An
alternative paradigm is to use reinforcement learning (RL)
to learn data gathering actions. Though emerging works in
RL for IPP demonstrate promising results [12, 13], they have
been limited to small 2D action spaces, and adaptive planning
to map environments with spatial correlations and large 3D
action spaces has not yet been investigated.
To address this, we propose a new RL-based IPP frame-
work suitable for UA V-based active sensing. Inspired by
recent advances in RL [14, 15], our method combines
Monte Carlo tree search (MCTS) with a convolutional neural
network (CNN) to learn information-rich actions in adaptive
data gathering missions. Since active sensing tasks are typi-
cally expensive to simulate, our approach caters for training
in low data regimes. By replacing the computational burden
of predictive planning with simple tree search, we achieve
efﬁcient online replanning, which is critical for deployment
on mobile robots (Fig. 1). The contributions of this work are:
1) A new deep RL algorithm for robotic planning applica-
tions that supports continuous high-dimensional state
spaces, large action spaces, and data-efﬁcient training.
2) The integration of our RL algorithm in an IPP frame-
work for UA V-based terrain monitoring.
3) The validation of our approach in an ablation study
and evaluations against benchmarks using synthetic
and real-world data showcasing its performance.
We open-source our framework for usage by the community.1
1github.com/dmar-bonn/ipp-rl
arXiv:2109.13570v2  [cs.RO]  3 Mar 2022
II. R ELATED WORK
Our work lies at the intersection of IPP for active sensing,
MCTS planning methods, and recent advances in RL.
IPP methods are gaining rapid traction in many active
sensing applications [1–3, 10]. In this area of study, our
work focuses on strategies with adaptive online replanning
capabilities, which allow the targeted monitoring of regions
of interest, e.g. hotspots or abnormal areas, in a priori
unknown environments [9]. Some methods focus on discrete
action spaces deﬁned by sparse graphs of permissible actions
[10, 11]. However, these simpliﬁcations are not applicable as
the distribution of target regions requires online decision-
making as they are discovered. Our proposed algorithm
reasons about a discrete action space magnitudes larger while
ensuring online computability. In terms of planning strategy,
IPP algorithms can be classiﬁed into combinatorial [16, 17],
sampling-based [3, 10], and optimization-based approaches
[1, 2]. Combinatorial methods exhaustively query the search
space. Thus, they cannot plan online in large search spaces,
which makes them impractical for adaptive replanning.
Continuous-space sampling-based planners generate in-
formative robot trajectories by sampling candidate actions
while guaranteeing probabilistically asymptotic optimality
[3, 8]. However, their sample-efﬁciency is typically low
for planning with more complex objectives and larger ac-
tion spaces since many measurements need to be forward-
simulated to ﬁnd promising paths in the problem space
[1, 18]. In our particular setup, considering spatial corre-
lations in a terrain over many candidate regions leads to
a complex and expensive-to-evaluate information criterion.
In similar scenarios, several works have investigated global
optimization, e.g. evolutionary algorithms [1, 2] or Bayesian
Optimization [8], to enhance planning efﬁciency. Although
these approaches deliver high-quality paths [1, 11], using
them for online decision-making is still computationally
expensive when reasoning about many spatially correlated
candidate future measurements.
In robotics, RL algorithms are increasingly being utilized
for search and rescue [19], information gathering [12],
and exploration of unknown environments [13]. Although
emerging works show promising performance, RL-based
approaches have not yet been investigated for online adaptive
IPP, instead being mostly restricted to environment explo-
ration tasks. To address this gap, we propose the ﬁrst RL
approach for adaptively planning informative paths online
over spatially correlated terrains with large action spaces.
Another well-studied planning paradigm is MCTS [20,
21]. Recently, MCTS extensions were proposed for large
action spaces [22] and partially observable environments
[23]. Choudhury et al. [10] applied a variant of MCTS
to obtain long-horizon, anytime solutions in adaptive IPP
problems. However, these online methods are restricted to
small action spaces and spatially uncorrelated environments.
Inspired by recent advances in RL [14, 15], our RL-based
algorithm bypasses computationally expensive MCTS roll-
outs and sample-inefﬁcient action selections with a learned
value function and an action policy, respectively. We extend
the AlphaZero algorithm by applying it to robotics tasks
with limited computational budget and low data regimes.
Related to our approach are RL methods which address
the exploration-exploitation trade-off at train time [24, 25].
However, our algorithm explicitly balances exploration and
exploitation at deploy time by combining a learned policy
with MCTS sampling-based planning in large action spaces.
III. B ACKGROUND
We begin by brieﬂy describing the general active sensing
problem and specifying the terrain monitoring scenario used
to develop our RL-based IPP approach.
A. Problem Formulation
The general active sensing problem aims to maximize
an information-theoretic criterion I(·) over a set of action
sequences Ψ, i.e. robot trajectories:
ψ∗ = argmax
ψ∈Ψ
I(ψ)
C(ψ), s.t. C(ψ)≤ B, (1)
where C : Ψ→ R+ maps an action sequence to its associated
execution cost, B∈ R+ is the robot’s budget limit, e.g. time
or energy, and I : Ψ → R+ is the information criterion,
computed from the new sensor measurements obtained by
executingψ.
This work focuses on the scenario of monitoring a terrain
using a UA V equipped with a camera. Speciﬁcally, in this
case, the costs C(ψ) of an action sequenceψ = (ψ1,...,ψ n)
of length n are deﬁned by the total ﬂight time:
C(ψ) =
n−1∑
i=1
c(ψi,ψ i+1), (2)
where ψi ∈ R3 is a 3D measurement position above the
terrain the image is registered from. c : R3× R3 →
R+ computes the ﬂight time costs between measurement
positions by a constant acceleration-deceleration±ua model
with maximum speed uv.
B. Terrain Mapping
We leverage the method of Popovi ´c et al. [1] for efﬁcient
probabilistic mapping of the terrain. The terrain ξ ⊂ R2
is discretized by a grid map X while the mapped target
variable, e.g. temperature, is a scalar ﬁeld ζ : ξ→ R. The
prior map distribution p(ζ|ξ)∼N (µ−,P −) is given by a
Gaussian Process (GP) deﬁned by a prior mean vector µ−
and covariance matrixP −. At mission time, a Kalman Filter
KF(µ−,P −,z,ψi) =µ+,P + is used to sequentially fuse
dataz∈ Rm observed at a measurement locationψi with the
last iteration’s map belief p(ζ|ξ)∼N (µ−,P −) in order
to obtain the posterior map mean µ+, and covariance P +.
For further details, the reader is referred to [1].
C. Utility Deﬁnition for Adaptive IPP
In Eq. (1), we deﬁne the A-optimal information criterion
associated with an action sequence of n measurements [26]:
I(ψ) =
n∑
i=1
Tr(P −)− Tr(P +), (3)
where P − and P + are obtained before and after applying
KF to the measurements observed along ψi, respectively.
We study an active sensing task where the goal is to gather
terrain areas with higher values of the target variable ζ, e.g.
high temperature. This scenario requires online replanning
to focus on mapping these areas of interest XI as they are
discovered, and is thus a relevant problem setup for our new
efﬁcient RL-based IPP strategy. We utilize conﬁdence-based
level sets to deﬁne XI [27]:
XI ={xi∈X |µ−
i +βP−
i,i≥µth}, (4)
whereµ−
i andP−
i,i are the mean and variance of grid cell xi.
β, µth∈ R+ are a user-deﬁned conﬁdence interval width
and threshold, respectively. Consequently, we restrict P −
and P + in Eq. (3) to the grid cells xi∈X I as deﬁned by
Eq. (4), noted as P −
XI andP +
XI respectively.
IV. A PPROACH
This section presents our new RL-based IPP approach for
active sensing. As shown in Fig. 2, we iteratively train a CNN
on diverse simulated terrain monitoring scenarios to learn the
most informative data gathering actions. The trained CNN is
leveraged during a mission to achieve fast online replanning.
A. Connection between IPP & RL
We ﬁrst cast the general IPP problem from Sec. III in
a RL setting. The value V (s) of a state s is deﬁned as
V (s) = r(s,a,s′) + γV (s′), where γ ∈ [0, 1], and s′ is
the successor state when choosing a next action ψi+1 =
a∼π(s) according to the policy π(·). A state s is deﬁned
by s = (sm,a−), where sm∼N (µ−,P −) is the current
map state, and a− is the previously executed action, i.e. the
current UA V position. Consequently,s′ = (s′
m,a ) is deﬁned
by s′
m ∼N (µ+,P +). In our work, the 3D action space
A is a discrete set of measurement positions. The reward
function r is deﬁned as:
r(s,a,s′) = Tr(P −
XI)− Tr(P +
XI)
c(a−, a) . (5)
We set γ = 1, such that V (·) restores Eq. (1).
B. Algorithm Overview
Our goal is to learn the best policies for IPP ofﬂine to
allow for fast online replanning at deployment. To achieve
this, we bring recent advances in RL by Silver et al. [14, 15]
into the robotics domain. In a similar spirit, our RL algorithm
combines MCTS with a policy-value CNN (Fig. 2). At train
time, the algorithm alternates between episode generation
and CNN training. For terrain monitoring, episodes are gen-
erated by simulating diverse scenarios varying in map priors,
target variables, and initial UA V positions as explained in
Sec. IV-C. Each episode step from a state s is planned by
a tree search producing a target value V (s) given by the
simulator and a target policy π(s) proportional to the tree’s
root node’s action visit counts.V (s) andπ(s) are stored in a
replay buffer used for CNN training. As described in Sec. IV-
E, we introduce a CNN architecture suitable for inference on
mobile robots. Further, Sec. IV-F proposes components for
low data regimes in robotics tasks, which are often expensive
to simulate.
Train network to predict action
policies and paths' utilities
Simulate terrain monitoring
episodes to gather train data
Policy Evaluation
Policy Improvement
Fig. 2: Overview of our RL-based IPP approach. We use a
CNN to predict policies and values guiding a tree search to ﬁnd
informative paths for data gathering. The CNN is iteratively trained
in simulation to improve the policy and value estimates.
C. Episode Generation at Train Time
The most recently trained CNN is used to simulate a ﬁxed
number of episodes. An episode terminates when the budget
B is spent or a maximum number of steps is reached. In
each step from state s, a tree search is executed for a certain
number of simulations as described in Sec. IV-D. The policy
π(s) is derived from the root node’s action visits N(s,a ):
π(s)a = N(s,a )1/τ
∑
a′∈AN(s,a′)1/τ, (6)
whereA is the set of next measurement positions reachable
within the remaining budget b. τ is a hyper-parameter
smoothing policies to be uniform asτ→∞ and collapsing to
argmaxa∈Aπ(s)a asτ→0. The action is sampled from a∼
π(s) and the next map state is given by KF(·,P −,·,a ) =
s′
m. r and b are given by Eq. (5) and c(a−,a ) respectively.
The tuple (s,a,π(s),V (s),b ) is stored in the replay buffer.
D. Tree Search with Neural Networks
As shown in Fig. 3, a ﬁxed number of simulations is
executed by traversing the tree. Each simulation terminates
when the budget or a maximal depth is exceeded. The tree
search queries the CNN for policy and value estimates p,v
at leaf nodes with state s(l) and stores the node’s prior
probabilitiesP (s(l)) =p. The probabilistic upper conﬁdence
tree (PUCT) bound is used to traverse the tree [28]:
PUCT(s,a ) =Q(s,a )
+ Pa(s)
√
N(s)
1 +N(s,a )
(
c1 + log
[N(s) +c2 + 1
c2
])
, (7)
whereQ(s,a ) =r(s,a,s′)+γ·V (s′) is the state-action value
and N(s) =∑
a′∈AN(s,a′) is the visit count of the parent
node s. c1,c 2∈ R+ are exploration factors. We choose the
next action a = argmaxa′∈A PUCT(s, a’).
As the reward has no ﬁxed scale, in Eq. (7), we min-max
normalize Q(s,a ) to ˜Q(s,a )∈ [0, 1] across all a∈A in s.
To enforce exploration, similarly to Silver et al. [14], we add
Dirichlet-noise to P (s(r)) of the root node with state s(r):
P (s(r)) = (1−ϵ)π(s(r)) +ϵη, (8)
where ϵ∈ [0, 1], and the noise η∼ Dir(δ), δ >0.
E. Network Architecture & Training
The CNN fθ(s) = (p,v ) is parameterized by θ predicting
a policyp and valuev. Input to the CNN are (a) the min-max
Fig. 3: Tree search with a CNN . The colored gradients represent
the map state at each node and the arrows indicate how these map
states evolve as potential measurement are taken. (1) The predicted
policies p steer traversing the tree, and (2) the predicted values
v avoid expensive high-variance rollouts at leaf nodes. (3) The
predicted value is used to update the parent nodes’ value estimates.
normalized current map covariance P −
XI; (b) the remaining
budget b≤ B normalized over B; (c) the UA V position a−
normalized over the bounds of the 3D action space A; and
(d) a costs feature map C of same shape as P −
XI with C[i, :
] = c(ai,a ), subsequently min-max normalized. Note that
the scalar inputs are expanded to feature maps of the same
shape asP −
XI. Additionally, we input a history of the previous
two covariance, position, and budget input planes.
Fig. 4: Our policy-value CNN architecture. We leverage an
ERFNet encoder [29] with 10 residual blocks providing shared
representations for the policy and value prediction. Both heads
consist of three convolutional blocks and global average pooling
to make the CNN input size-agnostic. Last, fully connected layers
project to a policy vector (Softmax) and single positive scalar value
(Softplus). Feature map dimensions are w.r.t. 10×10 grid mapsX .
As visualized in Fig. 4, the CNN has a shared encoder.
We leverage Non-bottleneck-1D blocks proposed by Romera
et al. [29] to reduce inference time. The encoder is fol-
lowed by two separate prediction heads for policy and
value estimates. Both heads consist of three blocks with
2D convolution, batch norm, and SiLU activations. The last
block’s output feature maps in each head are ﬂattened to
ﬁxed dimensions by global average and max pooling before
applying a fully connected layer. This reduces the number of
parameters and ensures an input size-agnostic architecture.
The CNN parameters θ are trained with stochastic gradient
descent (SGD) on mini-batches of size 96 to minimize:
l(s) =α· (V (s)−v)2−β·π(s)T logp +λ·‖θ‖2, (9)
where the loss coefﬁcients α,β,λ ≥ 0 are hyperparameters.
SGD uses a one-cycle learning rate over three epochs [30].
F . AlphaZero in Low Data Regimes
Adaptive IPP with spatio-temporal correlations is expen-
sive to simulate. Opposed to fast-to-simulate games such as
Go or chess [15], real-world robotics tasks are often limited
in the number of simulations and episodes at train time.
A major shortcoming of the original AlphaZero algorithm
[15] is that the policy targets in Eq. (6) merely reﬂect the tree
search exploration dynamics. However, the raw action visit
countsN(s,a ) do not necessarily capture the gathered state-
action value information for a ﬁnite number of simulations.
Hence, with only a moderate number of simulations per
episode step, AlphaZero tends to overemphasize initially
explored actions in subsequent training iterations, leading
to bias in training data and thus overestimated state-action
values. As Eq. (7) is also guided by Q(s,a ), the overem-
phasis on initially explored actions induces overﬁtting and
low-quality policies. Next, we introduce methods to solve
these problems and increase efﬁciency of our RL algorithm.
To avoid overemphasizing random actions in the node se-
lection, a large exploration constantc1 in Eq. (7) is desirable.
However, in later training iterations, increasing exploitation
of known good actions is required to ensure convergence.
Thus, we propose an exponentially decaying exploration
constantc(i)
1 = max(c(start)
1 ·λi
c1, c(min)
1 ), wherei∈ N is the
training iteration number, c(start)
1 > 0 is the initial constant,
λc1 > 0 is the exponential decay factor, and c(min)
1 > 0 is
the minimal value. Similarly, for the Dirichlet exploration
noise in Eq. (8) deﬁned by δ, we introduce an exponentially
decaying schedulingδ(i) = max(δ(start)·λi
δ, δ(min)), where
δ(start) > 0 is the initial value, λδ > 0 is the exponential
decay factor, and δ(min)> 0 is the minimal value. A high
δ(start) around 1 leads to a uniform noise distribution η
avoiding overemphasis on random actions. However, δ(i)
should decrease with increasingi to exploit the learnedπ(s).
Next, we propose an increasing replay buffer size w to
accelerate training. Similar to our approach, adaptive replay
buffers are known to improve performance in other RL
domains [31]. On the one hand, a substantial amount of data
is required to train the CNN on a variety of paths. On the
other hand, the loss (Eq. (9)) initially shows sudden drops
when outdated train data leaves the replay buffer. Thus, in
early training stages, a small w improves convergence speed.
Largerw in later training stages help regularize training and
ensure train data diversity. Hence, w is adaptively set to:
w(i) = min
(⌊
w(start) + i
w(step)
⌋
,w (max)
)
, (10)
where w(start)∈ N+ and w(max)∈ N+ are the initial and
maximum window sizes. The window size is increased by
one each w(step)∈ N+ training iterations.
Moreover, we adapt two techniques introduced by Wu
[32] for the game of Go. First, forced playouts and policy
pruning decouple exploration dynamics and policy targets.
While traversing the search tree, underexplored root node
actions a are chosen by setting PUCT(s(root),a ) =∞ in
Eq. (7). In Eq. (6), action visits N(s(root),a ) are subtracted
unless action a led to a high-value successor state. Second,
in regular intervals in the encoder, and as the ﬁrst layers of
the value and policy head, we use global pooling bias layers.
This enables our CNN to focus on local and global features
required for IPP. Further details are discussed by Wu [32].
Variant 33% Tr(P ) ↓ 67% Tr(P ) ↓ 100% Tr(P ) ↓ 33% RMSE ↓ 67% RMSE ↓ 100% RMSE ↓ Runtime [s] ↓
Baseline as in Sec. IV 73.61 31.83 12.44 0.15 0.09 0.05 0.64
(i) w/ ﬁxed off-policy window 83.25 50.17 24.68 0.16 0.12 0.09 0.68
(i) w/ ﬁxed exploration constants 95.27 39.46 21.86 0.20 0.11 0.08 0.65
(i) w/o forced playouts + policy pruning 79.23 28.53 22.62 0.18 0.09 0.07 0.66
(ii) w/o global pooling bias blocks 103.58 45.78 31.44 0.19 0.11 0.10 0.64
(ii) 5 residual blocks in encoder 82.90 29.94 17.94 0.16 0.08 0.07 0.55
(ii) w/o input feature history 102.40 40.48 31.33 0.20 0.10 0.09 0.66
TABLE I: Ablation study results . We systematically (i) remove components, and (ii) change the CNN architecture to quantify their
impact. Remaining uncertainty Tr(P ) and RMSE in the map state are evaluated after 33%, 67%, and 100% spent effective mission time.
Our approach as proposed in Sec. IV achieves the fastest and most stable reductions in uncertainty and RMSE over the mission time.
G. Planning at Mission Time
Replanning is performed after each map update. Using the
trained CNN, we perform tree search from the current state
s, choosing action a from π(s) with τ→ 0 in Eq. (6), i.e.
a = argmaxa∈Aπ(s)a. Since π(·) steers the exploration,
the tree search is highly sample-efﬁcient. This way, the
number of tree search simulations is greatly reduced to allow
fast replanning. Note that policy noise injection and forced
playouts at the root are disabled to improve performance.
V. E XPERIMENTAL RESULTS
This section presents our experimental results. We ﬁrst
validate our RL approach in an ablation study, then assess its
IPP and runtime performance in terrain monitoring scenarios.
A. Experimental Setup
Our simulation setup considers terrains ξ with 2D discrete
ﬁeld mapsX with values between 0 and 1, randomly split in
high- and low-value regions to create regions of interest as
deﬁned by Eq. (4). We model ground truth terrain maps of
40×40m andr×r [m],r∈ R, resolution. The UA V action
space of measurement locations is deﬁned by a discrete 3D
lattice above the terrain ξ. The lattice mirrors the g×g grid
mapX on two altitude levels ( 8 m and 14 m), resulting in
2·g2 actions. The missions are implemented in Python on a
desktop with a 1.8 GHz Intel i7, 16 GB RAM without GPU
acceleration to avoid unfair advantages in inference speed of
our CNN. We repeat the missions 10 times and report means
and standard deviations. Our RL algorithm is trained ofﬂine
on a single machine with a 2.2 GHz AMD Ryzen 9 3900X,
63GB RAM, and a NVIDIA GeForce RTX 2080 Ti GPU.
We use the same altitude-dependent inverse sensor model
as Popovi´c et al. [1] to simulate camera measurement noise,
assuming a downwards-facing square camera footprint with
60◦ FoV . The prior map mean is uniform with a value of
0.5. The GP is deﬁned by Mat ´ern 3/2 kernel with length
scale 3.67, signal variance 1.82, and noise variance 1.42 by
maximizing log marginal likelihood over independent maps.
The threshold µth = 0.4 deﬁnes regions of interest.
We set the mission budget B = 150 s, the UA V initial
position to (2, 2, 14)m, the acceleration-deceleration±ua =
2 m/s2 with maximum speed uv = 2 m/s. At train time,
each episode randomly generates a new ground truth map,
map priors from a wide range of GP hyperparameters and
UA V start positions, such that our approach has no unfair
overﬁtting advantage. We evaluate map uncertainty with
Tr(P +) and the root mean squared error (RMSE) of µ+
in regions of interest to assess planning performance. Lower
values indicate better performance. In contrast to earlier work
[1, 2, 10], the remaining budget does not only incorporate the
path travel time, but also the planning runtime, as relevant
for robotic platforms with limited on-board resources. We
refer to the spent budget B as the effective mission time .
B. Ablation Study
This section validates the algorithm design and CNN
architecture introduced in Sec. IV. We perform an ablation
study comparing our approach to versions of itself (i) re-
moving proposed training procedure components, and (ii)
changing the CNN architecture. We assume a resolution of
r = 4m resulting in a 10×10 grid map X withA of 200
actions. Note that the results do not depend on the actual size
ofX andA. We generate a small number of 280 episodes in
each iteration and terminate training after 40 iterations. Each
tree search is executed as described in Sec. IV-G with 10
simulations and exploration constants c(start)
1 =15,c (min)
1 =
4,λc1 =λδ = 0.8,δ (start) = 1.0,δ (min) = 0.3,c 2 = 10000.
Table I summarizes our results. We evaluate map uncertainty
and RMSE over the posterior map state after 33%, 67%, and
100% effective mission time , and average planning runtime.
As proposed in Eq. (10), the training procedure considers
a replay buffer with adaptive size w(start) = 1,w (step) =
2,w (max) = 10. Convergence speed, and thus performance,
improves compared to a ﬁxed-size bufferw(i) =10. Also, our
proposed exploration constants scheduling scheme improves
plan quality by stabilizing the exploration-exploitation trade-
off compared to ﬁxed constants c(i)
1 = 4,δ (i) = 0.3. Further,
the results show the beneﬁts of including a history of the two
previous map states and UA V positions in addition to their
current values. Interestingly, reducing the encoder depth from
10 to 5 blocks and removing forced playouts both perform
reasonably well, but still lead to worse results in later mission
stages. This suggests that deeper CNNs and forced playouts
facilitate learning in larger grid maps and longer missions.
Similarly, global pooling bias blocks help learning global
map features, which beneﬁts information-gathering.
C. Comparison Against Benchmarks
Next, our RL algorithm is evaluated against benchmarks.
We set a resolution r = 2.5 m, hence X is a 15× 15
grid, and A has 450 actions. Our approach is compared
against: (a) uniform random sampling in A; (b) coverage
Fig. 5: Evaluation of our approach against benchmarks. On average, our RL approach ensures the fastest uncertainty and RMSE
reduction in regions of interest over mission time. Solid lines indicate means over 10 trials, and shaded regions indicate the standard
deviations. Note that there is inherent variability due to the randomly generated hotspot locations. However, our method ensures stable
performance over changing environments. Further, replanning runtime is reduced by a factor of 8− 10×. The planned path (evolving over
time from blue to red) validates the adaptive behavior of our approach exploring the terrain with focus on the high-value region (green).
path with equispaced measurements at a ﬁxed 8 m altitude;
(c) MCTS with progressive widening [22] for large action
spaces and a generalized cost-beneﬁt rollout policy proposed
by Choudhury et al. [10]; (d) a state-of-the-art IPP framework
using the Covariance Matrix Adaptation Evolution Strategy
(CMA-ES) proposed by Popovi ´c et al. [1]. All planners
consider a 5-step horizon. We set CMA-ES parameters to
45 iterations, 12 offsprings, and (4, 4, 3) m coordinate-wise
step size to trade-off between performance and runtime. The
permissible next actions of MCTS are reduced to a radius
of 11m around the UA V to be computable online, resulting
in∼ 115 next actions per move. For a fair comparison, we
trained our approach on this restricted action space, which
is still much larger than studied in prior work [10, 11].
Fig. 5 reports the results obtained using each approach.
Our method substantially reduces runtime, achieving a
speedup of 8− 10× compared to CMA-ES and MCTS.
This result highlights the improved sample-efﬁciency in our
tree search and conﬁrms that the CNN can learn informative
actions from training in diverse simulated missions. Random
sampling performs poorly as it reduces uncertainty and
RMSE in high-value regions only by chance. The coverage
path shows high variability since data-gathering efﬁciency
greatly depends on the problem setup, i.e. hotspot locations
relative to the preplanned path. Our approach outperforms
this benchmark with much greater consistency.
D. Temperature Mapping Scenario
We demonstrate our RL-based IPP approach in a photore-
alistic simulation using real-world surface temperature data.
The data was collected in a 40× 40 m crop ﬁeld nearby
Forschungszentrum J ¨ulich, Germany (50.87◦ lat., 6.44◦ lon.)
on July 20, 2021 with a DJI Matrice 600 UA V carrying a
Vue Pro R 640 thermal sensor. The UA V executed a coverage
path at 100 m altitude to collect images, which were then
processed using Pix4D software to generate an orthomosaic
representing the target terrain in our simulation as depicted in
Fig. 1-left. The aim is to validate our method for adaptively
mapping high-temperature areas in this realistic setting.
For fusing new data into the map, we assume altitude-
dependent sensor noise as described in Sec. V-A. The terrain
is discretized using a uniform 2.5m resolution. We compare
our RL-based online algorithm against a ﬁxed 8 m altitude
Fig. 6: Real-world scenario. (Left) Surface temperature of a crop
ﬁeld used for the conducted real-world experiments. (Right) Our
RL approach ensures fast uncertainty reduction in high-temperature
regions (red) outperforming traditionally used coverage paths.
lawnmower path as a traditional baseline. Our approach is
trained only on synthetic simulated data as shown in Fig. 5.
Fig. 1-right shows the planned 3D path above the terrain
using our strategy. This conﬁrms that our method collects
targeted measurements in hotter areas of interest (red) by
efﬁcient online replanning. This is reﬂected quantitatively
in Fig. 6-right as our approach ensures fast uncertainty
reduction while a coverage path performs worse as it cannot
adapt mapping behaviour. These results verify the successful
transfer of our model trained in simulation to real-world data
and demonstrate its beneﬁts over a traditional approach.
VI. C ONCLUSIONS AND FUTURE WORK
This paper proposes a new RL-based approach for online
adaptive IPP using resource-constrained robots. The algo-
rithm enables sample-efﬁcient planning in large action spaces
and high-dimensional state spaces, enabling fast information
gathering in active sensing tasks. A key feature of our
approach are components for accelerated learning in low data
regimes. We validate the approach in an ablation study, and
evaluate its performance compared to multiple benchmarks.
Results show that our approach drastically reduces planning
runtime, enabling efﬁcient adaptive replanning. Future work
will investigate extending our algorithm to multi-robot teams
and dynamically growing maps. We plan to conduct real-
world ﬁeld experiments to validate our method.
ACKNOWLEDGEMENT
We would like to thank Jordan Bates from Forschungszen-
trum J ¨ulich for providing the real-world data.
REFERENCES
[1] M. Popovi ´c, T. Vidal-Calleja, G. Hitz, J. J. Chung, I. Sa, R. Siegwart,
and J. Nieto, “An informative path planning framework for UA V-based
terrain monitoring,” Autonomous Robots, vol. 44, no. 6, pp. 889–911,
2020.
[2] G. Hitz, E. Galceran, M.- `E. Garneau, F. Pomerleau, and R. Siegwart,
“Adaptive continuous-space informative path planning for online en-
vironmental monitoring,” Journal of Field Robotics, vol. 34, no. 8, pp.
1427–1449, 2017.
[3] G. A. Hollinger and G. S. Sukhatme, “Sampling-based robotic infor-
mation gathering algorithms,” The International Journal of Robotics
Research, vol. 33, no. 9, pp. 1271–1287, 2014.
[4] M. Dunbabin and L. Marques, “Robots for Environmental Monitor-
ing: Signiﬁcant Advancements and Applications,” IEEE Robotics &
Automation Magazine, vol. 19, no. 1, pp. 24–39, 2012.
[5] C. C. Lelong, P. Burger, G. Jubelin, B. Roux, S. Labb ´e, and F. Baret,
“Assessment of Unmanned Aerial Vehicles Imagery for Quantitative
Monitoring of Wheat Crop in Small Plots,” Sensors, vol. 8, no. 5, pp.
3557–3585, 2008.
[6] P. Doherty and P. Rudol, “A UA V search and rescue scenario with
human body detection and geolocalization,” in Australasian Joint
Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence . Springer, 2007, pp. 1–13.
[7] E. Galceran and M. Carreras, “A survey on coverage path planning
for robotics,” Robotics and Autonomous Systems , vol. 61, no. 12, pp.
1258–1276, 2013.
[8] K. C. T. Vivaldini, T. H. Martinelli, V . C. Guizilini, J. R. Souza, M. D.
Oliveira, F. T. Ramos, and D. F. Wolf, “UA V route planning for active
disease classiﬁcation,” Autonomous robots, vol. 43, no. 5, pp. 1137–
1153, 2019.
[9] A. Blanchard and T. Sapsis, “Informative path planning for anomaly
detection in environment exploration and eonitoring,” arXiv preprint
arXiv:2005.10040, 2020.
[10] S. Choudhury, N. Gruver, and M. J. Kochenderfer, “Adaptive In-
formative Path Planning with Multimodal Sensing,” in International
Conference on Automated Planning and Scheduling , vol. 30. AAAI
Press, 2020, pp. 57–65.
[11] M. Popovi ´c, T. Vidal-Calleja, J. J. Chung, J. Nieto, and R. Siegwart,
“Informative Path Planning for Active Field Mapping under Localiza-
tion Uncertainty,” in IEEE International Conference on Robotics and
Automation. IEEE, 2020.
[12] A. Viseras and R. Garcia, “DeepIG: Multi-robot information gathering
with deep reinforcement learning,” IEEE Robotics and Automation
Letters, vol. 4, no. 3, pp. 3059–3066, 2019.
[13] F. Chen, J. D. Martin, Y . Huang, J. Wang, and B. Englot, “Autonomous
Exploration Under Uncertainty via Deep Reinforcement Learning on
Graphs,” in IEEE/RSJ International Conference on Intelligent Robots
and Systems. IEEE, 2020, pp. 6140–6147.
[14] D. Silver, J. Schrittwieser, K. Simonyan, I. Antonoglou, A. Huang,
A. Guez, T. Hubert, L. Baker, M. Lai, A. Bolton et al. , “Mastering
the game of Go without human knowledge,” Nature, vol. 550, no.
7676, pp. 354–359, 2017.
[15] D. Silver, T. Hubert, J. Schrittwieser, I. Antonoglou, M. Lai, A. Guez,
M. Lanctot, L. Sifre, D. Kumaran, T. Graepel et al. , “A general
reinforcement learning algorithm that masters chess, shogi, and Go
through self-play,” Science, vol. 362, no. 6419, pp. 1140–1144, 2018.
[16] C.-W. Ko, J. Lee, and M. Queyranne, “An Exact Algorithm for
Maximum Entropy Sampling,” Operations Research, vol. 43, no. 4,
pp. 684–691, 1995.
[17] J. Binney and G. S. Sukhatme, “Branch and bound for informative
path planning,” in IEEE International Conference on Robotics and
Automation. IEEE, 2012, pp. 2147–2154.
[18] M. N. Omidvar and X. Li, “A Comparative Study of CMA-ES on
Large Scale Global Optimisation,” in Australasian Joint Conference
on Artiﬁcial Intelligence . Springer, 2010, pp. 303–312.
[19] F. Niroui, K. Zhang, Z. Kashino, and G. Nejat, “Deep reinforcement
learning robot for search and rescue applications: Exploration in
unknown cluttered environments,” IEEE Robotics and Automation
Letters, vol. 4, no. 2, pp. 610–617, 2019.
[20] C. B. Browne, E. Powley, D. Whitehouse, S. M. Lucas, P. I. Cowling,
P. Rohlfshagen, S. Tavener, D. Perez, S. Samothrakis, and S. Colton,
“A Survey of Monte Carlo Tree Search Methods,” IEEE Transactions
on Computational Intelligence and AI in Games , vol. 4, no. 1, pp.
1–43, 2012.
[21] G. Chaslot, S. Bakkes, I. Szita, and P. Spronck, “Monte-Carlo Tree
Search: A New Framework for Game AI,” AAAI Conference on
Artiﬁcial Intelligence and Interactive Digital Entertainment , vol. 8,
pp. 216–217, 2008.
[22] Z. N. Sunberg and M. J. Kochenderfer, “Online algorithms for
POMDPs with continuous state, action, and observation spaces,” in
International Conference on Automated Planning and Scheduling .
AAAI Press, 2018.
[23] D. Silver and J. Veness, “Monte-Carlo planning in large POMDPs,”
in Neural Information Processing Systems , 2010.
[24] J. Schulman, F. Wolski, P. Dhariwal, A. Radford, and O. Klimov,
“Proximal policy optimization algorithms,” arXiv preprint
arXiv:1707.06347, 2017.
[25] T. Haarnoja, A. Zhou, P. Abbeel, and S. Levine, “Soft actor-critic: Off-
policy maximum entropy deep reinforcement learning with a stochastic
actor,” in International Conference on Machine Learning . PMLR,
2018, pp. 1861–1870.
[26] R. Sim and N. Roy, “Global A-optimal Robot Exploration in SLAM,”
in IEEE International Conference on Robotics and Automation. IEEE,
2005, pp. 661–666.
[27] A. Gotovos, N. Casati, G. Hitz, and A. Krause, “Active Learning for
Level Set Estimation,” in International Joint Conference on Artiﬁcial
Intelligence. AAAI Press, 2013, pp. 1344–1350.
[28] J. Schrittwieser, I. Antonoglou, T. Hubert, K. Simonyan, L. Sifre,
S. Schmitt, A. Guez, E. Lockhart, D. Hassabis, T. Graepel et al. ,
“Mastering Atari, Go, chess and shogi by planning with a learned
model,” Nature, vol. 588, no. 7839, pp. 604–609, 2020.
[29] E. Romera, J. M. Alvarez, L. M. Bergasa, and R. Arroyo, “ERFNet:
Efﬁcient Residual Factorized ConvNet for Real-Time Semantic Seg-
mentation,” IEEE Transactions on Intelligent Transportation Systems ,
vol. 19, no. 1, pp. 263–272, 2017.
[30] L. N. Smith, “A disciplined approach to neural network hyper-
parameters: Part 1 – rate, batch size, momentum, and weight decay,”
arXiv, 2018.
[31] R. Liu and J. Zou, “The Effects of Memory Replay in Reinforcement
Learning,” in Allerton Conference on Communication, Control, and
Computing. IEEE, 2018, pp. 478–485.
[32] D. J. Wu, “Accelerating Self-Play Learning in Go,” arXiv, 2019.