arXiv:1405.4720v1  [stat.ME]  19 May 2014
Statistical Science
2014, Vol. 29, No. 1, 69–80
DOI: 10.1214/13-STS420
c© Institute of Mathematical Statistics , 2014
Search for the Wreckage of Air France
Flight AF 447 1
Lawrence D. Stone, Colleen M. Keller, Thomas M. Kratzke and J ohan P. Strumpfer
Abstract. In the early morning hours of June 1, 2009, during a ﬂight
from Rio de Janeiro to Paris, Air France Flight AF 447 disappe ared
during stormy weather over a remote part of the Atlantic carr ying 228
passengers and crew to their deaths. After two years of unsuc cessful
search, the authors were asked by the French Bureau d’Enquˆ e tes et
d’Analyses pour la s´ ecurit´ e de l’aviation to develop a pro bability dis-
tribution for the location of the wreckage that accounted fo r all infor-
mation about the crash location as well as for previous searc h eﬀorts.
We used a Bayesian procedure developed for search planning t o pro-
duce the posterior target location distribution. This dist ribution was
used to guide the search in the third year, and the wreckage wa s found
with one week of undersea search. In this paper we discuss why Bayesian
analysis is ideally suited to solving this problem, review p revious non-
Bayesian eﬀorts, and describe the methodology used to produc e the
posterior probability distribution for the location of the wreck.
Key words and phrases: AF 447, Bayesian, particle ﬁlter.
1. BACKGROUND
In the early morning hours of June 1, 2009, Air
France Flight AF 447, with 228 passengers and crew
aboard, disappeared during stormy weather over
the Atlantic while on a ﬂight from Rio de Janeiro
to Paris. Upon receiving notiﬁcation of the crash,
the French Bureau d’Enquˆ etes et d’Analyses (BEA)
pour la s´ ecurit´ e de l’aviation and French search and
rescue authorities organized an international search
Lawrence Stone is Chief Scientist, Colleen Keller and
Thomas Kratzke are Senior Analysts, Metron, Inc.,
1818 Library Street, Suite 600, Reston, Virginia 20190,
USA (e-mail: stone@metsci.com; keller@metsci.com;
kratzke@metsci.com; URL: www.metsci.com). Johan
Strumpfer is Visiting Professor, Graduate School of
Business, University of Cape Town, Cape Town, South
Africa (e-mail: Johan.Strumpfer@gmail.com).
1Discussed in 10.1214/13-STS447 and 10.1214/13-STS463.
This is an electronic reprint of the original article
published by the Institute of Mathematical Statistics in
Statistical Science, 2014, Vol. 29, No. 1, 69–80 . This
reprint diﬀers from the original in pagination and
typographic detail.
by aircraft and surface ships to look for signs of the
plane and possible survivors. On the sixth day of
this eﬀort, the ﬁrst debris and bodies were found
38 NM north of the aircraft’s last known position.
That day a large portion of the galley was found
along with other debris and some bodies. Figure 1
shows the aircraft’s last known position, intended
ﬂight path and a 40 NM circle about the last known
position. Analysis by the BEA determined that the
wreckage had to lie within 40 NM of the plane’s last
known position.
The aircraft was equipped with a ﬂight data
recorder and a cockpit voice recorder. Each of these
recorders was ﬁtted with an underwater locator bea-
con that activates an acoustic signal upon contact
with water. The BEA initiated a search to detect
these beacons. The search was performed by two
ships employing passive acoustic sensors supplied
by the U.S. Navy and operated by personnel from
Phoenix International. The search began on June
10, 2009 and lasted 31 days until the time when the
batteries in the beacons were estimated to be ex-
hausted. The ships searched extensively along the
intended ﬂight path, but the beacons were not de-
1
2 STONE, KELLER, KRATZKE AND STRUMPFER
Fig. 1. Last known position of the aircraft, intended ﬂight path and the 40 NM circle.
tected. Next the BEA began an active acoustic
search with side-looking sonar to detect the wreck-
age on the ocean bottom. This search took place in
August 2009 south of the last known position in an
area not covered by the passive acoustic search. This
search was also unsuccessful.
After the unsuccessful search in 2009, the BEA
commissioned a group of oceanographic experts to
estimate the currents in the area at the time of the
crash and to use these estimates along with the
times and locations where the surface search had
found bodies and debris in order to estimate the
location of the wreckage. In [ 6] the group recom-
mended the rectangular search area north and west
of the last known position shown in Figure 2. This
rectangle is described as a 95% conﬁdence zone. The
group used available current measurements to make
a number of estimates of the currents in the area
of the wreck at the time of the loss. Using these
estimates, they performed a backward drift on re-
covered debris and bodies to produce a number of
trajectories ending at an estimated location of the
crash. The group removed trajectories that they felt
were outliers. A bivariate normal error was esti-
mated for each of the remaining crash location esti-
mates and used to produce a weighted mean with a
bivariate normal error distribution. This error dis-
tribution was used to compute a rectangle centered
at the mean with a 95% probability of “containing”
the wreck location. This rectangle guided the active
acoustic search in April and May of 2010.
The 2010 searches were performed by two teams.
The U.S. Navy and Phoenix International team used
a towed side-scan sonar system. The Woods Hole
Oceanographic Institute team used autonomous
underwater vehicles with side-scan sonars and a
remotely operated vehicle. After an unsuccessful
search in the rectangle, the teams extended their
eﬀorts to the south and west of the rectangle. Un-
fortunately, this search was also unsuccessful.
In July 2010 we were tasked by the BEA to review
all information about the loss of AF 447 as well as
the previous search eﬀorts to produce a probabil-
ity distribution (map) for the location of the under-
water wreckage. The probability maps that resulted
from this process were used to guide the 2011 search.
On April 3, 2011, almost two years after the loss
of the aircraft, the underwater wreckage was located
SEARCH FOR AIR FRANCE FLIGHT AF 447 3
Fig. 2. The 95% conﬁdence zone recommended in [ 6] for the 2010 search area.
on the ocean bottom some 14,000 feet below the
surface. On April 8, 2011, the director of the BEA
stated, “This study [ 10] published on the BEA web-
site on 20 January 2011, indicated a strong possi-
bility for discovery of the wreckage near the center
of the Circle. It was in this area that it was in fact
discovered after one week of exploration” [ 11]. Sub-
sequently, the ﬂight data recorder and cockpit voice
recorder were found, retrieved from the ocean bot-
tom and ﬂown to the BEA in Paris where the data
in these recorders were recovered and analyzed. This
data provided crucial information for determining
the cause of the crash. Finding the wreckage also
allowed the BEA to return the bodies of many pas-
sengers and crew to their loved ones.
In the sections below we describe the Bayesian
process used to compute these probability distribu-
tions.
2. WHY BAYESIAN ANALYSIS
Bayesian analysis is ideally suited to planning
complicated and diﬃcult searches involving uncer-
tainties that are quantiﬁed by a combination of ob-
jective and subjective probabilities. This approach
has been applied to a number of important and
successful searches in the past, in particular, the
searches for the USS Scorpion [7] and SS Central
America [8]. This approach is the basis for the U.S.
Coast Guard’s Search and Rescue Optimal Planning
System (SAROPS) that is used to plan Coast Guard
maritime searches for people and ships missing at
sea [ 5].
Complicated searches such as the one for AF 447
are onetime events. We are not able to recreate the
conditions of the crash 1000 times and record the
distribution of locations where the aircraft hits the
water. As a result, deﬁnitions of probability distribu-
tions in terms of relative frequencies of events do not
apply. Instead, we are faced with computing a prob-
ability distribution on the location of the wreckage
(search object) in the presence of uncertainties and
conﬂicting information that require the use of sub-
jective probabilities. The probability distribution on
which the search is based is therefore a subjective
one. It is based on the analysts’ best understanding
of the uncertainties in the information about the lo-
cation of the search object.
In an ideal situation, search eﬀort is applied in an
optimal fashion to maximize the probability of de-
tecting the search object within the eﬀort available.
The optimal search problem is a Bayesian decision
problem often based on a subjective probability dis-
tribution [2–4, 9]. The basic optimal search problem
can be stated as follows.
The search object is located in one of J cells with
p(j) being the probability the object is in cell j. We
assume ∑J
j=1 p(j) = 1. For each cell j, there is a de-
tection function bj where bj(z) is the probability of
4 STONE, KELLER, KRATZKE AND STRUMPFER
detecting the object with eﬀort z given the object
is in cell j. Search eﬀort is often measured in hours,
which we will use for this discussion. A search allo-
cation Z speciﬁes the eﬀort zj ≥ 0 to be placed in
cell j for j = 1, . . . , J. The probability of detection
P(Z) and cost C(Z) for the search allocation Z are
computed by
P(Z) =
J∑
j=1
bj(zj)p(j) and C(Z) =
J∑
j=1
zj.
Suppose there are T hours of search available. The
optimal search problem is to ﬁnd an allocation Z ∗
for which C(Z ∗) ≤ T and
P(Z ∗) ≥ P(Z) for all Z such that C(Z) ≤ T.
As the search proceeds and the search object is
not found, the posterior distribution given failure of
the search is computed and used as the basis for
planning the next increment of search. Even at this
stage, subjective estimates of the detection capabil-
ity of the sensors must often be used because of the
lack of previous testing against the search object.
Classical statistics has no formalism for approaching
this type of decision problem. In contrast, Bayesian
statistics and decision theory are ideally suited to
the task.
3. ANALYSIS APPROACH
In the analysis that we performed for the BEA,
we were not called upon to provide a recommended
allocation of search eﬀort but only to compute the
posterior distribution for the location of the wreck-
age. The approach taken for this analysis follows
the model described in [ 7] and [ 8]. The informa-
tion about a complex search is often inconsistent
and contradictory. However, one can organize it into
self-consistent stories or scenarios about the loss of
the aircraft. Within each scenario, the uncertainties
in the information are quantiﬁed using probability
distributions. These distributions may be subjective
if little or no data is available to estimate the uncer-
tainties. For each scenario, a probability distribution
on target location is computed to reﬂect the un-
certainties in the information forming the scenario.
This is typically done by simulation. The result-
ing distributions are combined by assigning subjec-
tive probabilities to the scenarios and computing a
weighted mixture of these scenario distributions to
obtain the prior distribution. The subjective prob-
ability assigned to a scenario reﬂects the analysts’
evaluation of the probability that the scenario rep-
resents what happened.
We approximated the continuous spatial distribu-
tion for the location of the wreckage by a discrete
distribution represented by a set of N point masses
or particles ( xn, wn) for n = 1, . . . , N, where wn is
the probability mass attached to particle n. The
probabilities sum to 1. In the case of a stationary
search object, xn is a latitude-longitude point. In
the case of a moving object, xn is a continuous space
and time path over the time interval of interest. For
visualization purposes, a grid of cells is imposed on
the search space. Cell probabilities are computed by
summing the probabilities of the particles in each
cell, and the cells are color coded according to their
probabilities. For the ﬁgures in this paper we used a
black to white scale with black indicating the highest
probability cells and white the lowest. Computation
of the probability distributions described below was
performed by a modiﬁed version of SAROPS.
The computation of the posterior distribution in-
volves two basic steps, (1) computation of the prior
(before search) distribution and (2) computation
of the posterior distribution given the unsuccessful
search.
3.1 Prior Distribution
During ﬂight, a commercial aircraft sends mes-
sages via satellite containing maintenance and lo-
gistic information about the aircraft. Every 10 min-
utes it sends a GPS position for the aircraft. The
last known position, 2 .98◦N latitude /30.59◦W lon-
gitude, for AF 447 was sent at 02 hours 10 minutes
and 34 seconds Coordinated Universal Time on June
1, 2009. Based on failure to receive any messages af-
ter 02 hours, 14 minutes and 26 seconds, the BEA
estimated that the plane could not have traveled
more than 40 NM from its last known position be-
fore crashing into the ocean. Thus, we assumed the
location of the wreckage was within the 40 NM circle
centered at the last known position with probability
1. Any probability distribution for the location of
the wreckage that had probability outside this cir-
cle was truncated at the circle and renormalized to
a probability distribution. Errors in GPS positions
typically have a standard deviation of roughly 10 m
which is dwarfed by the other uncertainties in the
location of the aircraft, so this error was not consid-
ered to be signiﬁcant in our analysis.
The prior distribution P on the location of the
wreck was taken to be a mixture of three distribu-
tions, D1, D2 and D3. The distribution D1 is uni-
form within the 40 NM circle, and D2 is based on
SEARCH FOR AIR FRANCE FLIGHT AF 447 5
data from crashes that involved loss of control while
a plane was at ﬂight altitude. D3 is based on an anal-
ysis that drifted dead bodies found on the surface
backward in time to possible crash locations. On
the basis of discussions with analysts at the BEA,
we decided on the following subjective weights for
these distributions (scenarios), p1 = p2 = 0.35 and
p3 = 0.3 so that
P = p1D1 + p2D2 + p3D3.(3.1)
In retrospect, it appears it would have been more
appropriate to view D3 as a likelihood function and
multiply the distribution 0 .5D1 + 0.5D2 by D3 to
obtain the prior.
The distribution D2 is based on an analysis of
data from nine commercial aircraft accidents involv-
ing loss of control at ﬂight altitude. The analysis was
performed by the Russian Interstate Aviation Group
and the BEA. It showed that all impact points (ad-
justed to the 35,000-foot altitude at which AF 447
was cruising) were contained within a circle of ra-
dius 20 NM from the point at which the emergency
began. These results were represented by a circular
normal distribution centered at the last known po-
sition with standard deviation 8 NM along any axis.
We set D2 equal to this distribution truncated at
the 40 NM circle.
The D3 scenario is the reverse-drift scenario. The
distribution for this scenario was computed using
data on currents and winds to reverse the motion
of recovered bodies back to the time of impact.
We used current estimates produced for BEA [ 6]
and wind estimates from the U.S. Navy’s Opera-
tional Global Atmospheric Prediction System model
to perform the reverse drift.
At daylight on June 1st, 2009, French and Brazil-
ian aircraft began a visual search for survivors and
debris from the wreck. The ﬁrst debris was found on
June 6th, and more than 60 bodies were recovered
from June 6th–June 10th, 2009.
There are two components of drift, drift due to
ocean current and drift due to wind. The latter is
called leeway. To produce the reverse-drift scenario,
we used positions and times at which bodies were
recovered from June 6–10. We did not reverse-drift
pieces of debris because we lacked good leeway mod-
els for them, whereas we could use the model in [ 1]
for bodies. We used polygons to represent the posi-
tions of selected bodies recovered on each day from
June 6–10. For each polygon 16,000 positions were
drawn from a uniform distribution over the polygon.
Each position became a particle that was drifted
backward in time subject to winds and currents in
the following manner. We used a 60-minute time
step. For each step and each particle, a draw was
made from the distributions on wind and current
for the time and position of the particle in the man-
ner described below. The negative of the vector sum
of current plus the leeway resulting from the wind
was applied to the particle motion until the next
time step.
The large uncertainties in the ocean currents at
the time of the crash produced a distribution for
the crash location that spread way beyond the 40
NM circle. Figure 3 shows the reverse-drift distribu-
tion produced in this fashion and truncated at the
40 NM circle. Because of the large uncertainties in
the currents, this scenario was given a lower weight
than the other two that comprise the prior. Figure
4 shows the prior P . For the prior distribution and
the subsequent posteriors given failure to detect, we
used N = 75,000 points.
3.1.1 Simulating winds and currents This section
discusses simulation of winds and currents.
Wind and current estimates are provided by the
environmental community in the form of a grid of
velocity vectors ( u, v) indexed by space and time
where u is the speed in the east–west direction and
v is the speed in the north–south direction. We in-
terpret these as mean values of the actual wind and
current velocities and add a stochastic component
by the method described below.
To obtain ( u, v) for a wind or current at a time
that corresponds to a grid time but for a spatial
point that is not equal to one of the spatial grid
points, we take the three closest spatial grid points
and use a weighted average of the values at those
points, where the weights are proportional to the
inverses of the distances from the desired point to
the chosen grid points.
Most often we will need ( u, v) for times that are
not equal to one of the time grid values. To get ( u, v)
in this case, we use the values as calculated above for
the two closest times in the data and then linearly
interpolate between these values.
For every time step and every particle, the simula-
tion perturbs the speeds u and v obtained from the
data by adding a random draw from a normal dis-
tribution with a standard deviation of 0.22 kts for
current speeds and 2.0 kts for wind speeds. These
draws are independent for u and v and from par-
ticle to particle, but for a given particle and speed
6 STONE, KELLER, KRATZKE AND STRUMPFER
Fig. 3. Reverse drift distribution D3.
Fig. 4. Prior distribution P .
SEARCH FOR AIR FRANCE FLIGHT AF 447 7
the draws are correlated in time. Speciﬁcally, if ∆ t
is the increment in time, measured in minutes, be-
tween two time steps, then the correlation is given
by
ρ(∆t) = e−α∆t,
where α is chosen so that e−α60 = 1/2.
3.1.2 Simulating drift There are two forces acting
on a drifting particle: currents and winds. The eﬀect
of current is straightforward. The particle’s velocity
due to the current is equal to the velocity of the
current.
While it is reasonable to expect that a current of
3 knots will push an object at a speed of 3 knots,
the same is not true for the wind. Drift due to wind
(leeway) results from the sum of the force of the
wind acting on the exposed surfaces of the object
and the drag of the water acting on the submerged
surfaces of the object.
The wind does not push an object at the wind’s
speed, and it often does not push an object ex-
actly in the downwind direction. There is typically a
downwind and crosswind component of leeway. The
downwind component is in the direction the wind
is blowing. The crosswind component is perpendic-
ular to the downwind component, and the direc-
tion of the crosswind leeway is not predictable. To
account for this, the simulation switches between
the two crosswind directions at exponentially dis-
tributed times as it is producing a particle path. The
magnitudes of the downwind and crosswind compo-
nents are computed as follows.
For a given particle and time, we compute the
wind velocity from the gridded wind data in the
same fashion as for the ocean currents. Let W be re-
sulting wind speed expressed in meters per second.
For a deceased person ﬂoating in the water, we used
the following model developed in [ 1] to compute the
mean downwind leeway DW and crosswind leeway
CW measured in centimeters per second (cm/s):
DW = 1.17W + 10.2 cm/s ,
CW = 0.04W + 3.9 cm/s .
We added a random component to the mean values
computed above by adding the value of a draw from
a normal distribution with mean 0 and standard de-
viation equal to the standard error computed for the
regression used to estimate the mean downwind and
crosswind leeway, respectively. The time correlation
of the random components of leeway was handled in
the same way as for the ocean currents.
3.2 Posterior Distribution
The posterior distribution was computed in four
steps with each step accounting for an increment
of unsuccessful search. The result is the posterior
distribution on the wreck location given failure of
the search eﬀort in 2009 and 2010. The steps, that is,
increments of unsuccessful search, are listed below:
1. Failure of the surface search to ﬁnd debris or bod-
ies for almost 6 days during June 1–6, 2009.
2. Failure of the passive acoustic search to detect
the underwater locator beacons on the ﬂight data
recorder and cockpit voice recorder in June and
July 2009.
3. Failure of the active side-looking sonar search for
the wreckage in August 2009.
4. Failure of the active side-looking sonar search for
the wreckage in April and May of 2010.
We use the following notation for the posterior
distributions. ˜P1 denotes the posterior given fail-
ure of search increment 1; ˜P12 denotes the posterior
given failure of search increments 1 and 2, and so
on to ˜P1234 which denotes the posterior given fail-
ure of search increments 1–4. It is ˜P1234 that the
BEA used to plan the successful 2011 search. These
distributions were computed sequentially. First ˜P1
was computed and used as the “prior” for comput-
ing ˜P12. Then ˜P12 was used as the prior to compute
˜P123 and so on.
4. COMPUTING THE POSTERIORS
In this section we describe how we accounted for
the four increments of unsuccessful search by com-
puting the posterior distributions described above.
4.1 Accounting for Unsuccessful Search
We represented the prior distribution P by mak-
ing N = 75,000 independent draws from this distri-
bution for the location of the wreck on the ocean
bottom. For the nth particle we set xn equal to
the location of the nth draw and wn = 1 /N for
n = 1, . . . , N. If an unsuccessful search takes place,
we compute the probability pd(n) that the search
would have detected the search object if it were lo-
cated at xn. The posterior probabilities ˜ wn on the
particles are computed using Bayes’ rule as follows:
˜wn = (1 − pd(n))wn
∑N
n′=1(1 − pd(n′))wn′
(4.1)
for n = 1, . . . , N.
8 STONE, KELLER, KRATZKE AND STRUMPFER
The updated particles ( xn, ˜wn) for n = 1, . . . , N pro-
vide a discrete approximation to the posterior given
failure of the search.
If the search object is moving, then a stochas-
tic motion model must be speciﬁed. In addition to
drawing the initial position, we make draws from the
distributions speciﬁed by the motion model to cre-
ate a continuous time and space path for the search
object over the time interval of interest. Each par-
ticle is a path with a probability on it. The set of
particles is a discrete sample path approximation
to the stochastic process describing the motion of
the search object. When a search takes place, we
account for the motion of the particles and the sen-
sors in calculating pd(n). The posterior is again com-
puted from ( 4.1).
4.2 Step 1: Unsuccessful Surface Search
We decided to incorporate the eﬀect of the al-
most 6 days of unsuccessful surface search as follows.
Each point xn in the prior speciﬁes a location on
the ocean bottom. In the calculation of this distri-
bution, we assumed that when the aircraft crashed
into the surface of the ocean it fell straight to the
bottom some 14,000 feet below. It is likely that there
was some lateral motion as the wreckage drifted to
the bottom, but we reasoned that this uncertainty
was small compared to the other uncertainties in the
problem, so we ignored it.
For each particle we constructed a path starting at
the position of the particle projected up to the sur-
face of the ocean. We drifted the particle forward in
time for six days using the wind and current drift
model described in Section 3.1. However, this time
we used the drift vector itself rather than its nega-
tive. This produced a path for each particle. As with
the reverse drift scenario, the leeway component of
drift was based on that of a body in the water.
Aircraft searches are reported in terms of sorties.
Sorties described a sequence of straight line seg-
ments (ﬂight legs) ﬂown at speciﬁed times, speeds
and altitudes. Typically the set of legs for a sor-
tie covers a rectangular area on the ocean surface.
We used the detectability of the galley found on
the 6th day of surface search as a surrogate for the
detectability of the ﬂoating debris. We further as-
sumed that the detectability of the galley is equiva-
lent to that of a four-man raft (they are roughly the
same size). The Coast Guard has developed tables
that provide estimates of the probability of detect-
ing a four-man raft from an aircraft on one leg of
a sortie as a function of the speed and altitude of
the aircraft, range at the point of closest approach
to the search object on the leg, and environmental
variables such as visibility, cloud cover and sea state
of the ocean.
For each particle and each leg of each sortie, we
computed the range at closest point of approach and
used the Coast Guard tables to compute the prob-
ability that the particle would fail to be detected
on that leg. We assumed an independent detection
opportunity on each leg and multiplied the failure
probability for each leg and sortie to obtain an over-
all probability of failure to detect for each particle.
Search by ships was incorporated in a similar man-
ner. The result was the computation of the failure
probability q(n) for the air and ship searches for
each particle for the six days of unsuccessful search.
Because of the many uncertainties and approxi-
mations involved in the computation of the failure
probabilities for this search, and because we felt that
it was unlikely that the search would fail to detect
any debris for almost six days under the assumptions
we had made, we decided it was necessary to allow
for the possibility that the search was ineﬀective for
most of those six days for reasons unknown to us. We
made a subjective estimate that the search was in-
eﬀective (failure probability 1) with probability 0.7
and eﬀective [failure probability q(n)] with probabil-
ity 0.3. As a result we set 1 − pd(n) = 0.7 + 0.3q(n)
and computed the posterior probabilities w1
n = ˜wn
on the path of the nth particle by ( 4.1), which is
also the posterior probability on the wreck location
being equal to xn given failure of the six days of sur-
face search. Thus, ( xn, w1
n) for n = 1, . . . , N yields
the posterior distribution ˜P1. More details on the
aircraft searches may be found in [ 10].
4.3 Step 2: Passive Acoustic Search for the
Underwater Locator Beacons
The aircraft was equipped with a ﬂight data
recorder and a cockpit voice recorder. Each of these
recorders was ﬁtted with an underwater locator bea-
con that activates an acoustic signal upon contact
with water. The batteries on the locator beacons
were estimated to last for 40 days.
The passive acoustic search to detect these bea-
cons lasted 31 days ending on 10 July 2009. The
search was performed by two ships employing pas-
sive acoustic sensors supplied by the U.S. Navy and
operated by personnel from Phoenix International.
Based on a calculation involving the source level of
the beacons and propagation loss through the water,
we estimated the sensors to have probability at least
SEARCH FOR AIR FRANCE FLIGHT AF 447 9
Fig. 5. The vertical and horizontal lines show the search paths for t he passive acoustic search. The circles are the 20 and 40
NM circles about the last known position. The white rectangl e in row 24 was searched by side-looking sonar in August 2009.
0.9 of detecting the beacons within lateral range
1730 m. Experience in past searches has shown that
detection estimates based on manufacturers’ spec-
iﬁcations and operator estimates tend to be opti-
mistic. Thus, we put a maximum of 0.9 on estimates
of sensor detection probabilities. The search paths,
which are shown in Figure 5, were designed so that
1730 m would be the maximum lateral range to the
nearest path for any point in the search region.
In estimating the probability of detection for these
sensors we accounted for the possibility that one or
both of the beacons were destroyed in the crash.
Based on survival data for these beacons obtained
from previous crashes, we estimated a probability of
0.8 that a single beacon survived the crash. If beacon
survival is independent, then PD, the probability of
detecting at least one of the beacons given they are
within lateral range 1730 m of the sensor, equals
PD = (1 − (0.1)2)(0.8)2 + (0.9)(2(0.8)(0.2)) = 0.92.
If the beacons were mounted suﬃciently close to-
gether to consider their chances of survival to be
completely dependent, then the probability of de-
tecting at least one beacon drops to 0 .9 × 0.8 = 0.72.
We decided to use a weighted average of 0.25 for the
independent and 0.75 for the dependent probabili-
ties, yielding a detection probability of ¯PD = 77.
The ships tracks displayed in Figure 5 show the
passive acoustic search paths, which were designed
to cover the expected ﬂight path of the aircraft. We
computed the posterior distribution ˜P12 by start-
ing with ˜P1 as the prior and computing 1 − pd(n)
for each particle by the same method used for the
aircraft search. For each particle and path, we deter-
mined whether the path came within 1730 m of the
particle. If it did, the failure probability for that par-
ticle was multiplied by 1 − ¯PD = 0.23. The resulting
1 − pd(n) was used in ( 4.1) with wn = w1
n to compute
w2
n = ˜wn and the posterior distribution ˜P12.
4.4 Step 3: Active Side-Looking Sonar Search in
August 2009
The BEA employed a side-looking (active) sonar
from the French Research Institute for Exploration
of the Seas towed by the French research vessel
Pourquoi Pas ? to continue the search after the bat-
teries on the beacons were estimated to have been
exhausted. This search took place in August 2009
in the white rectangle in row 24 in Figure 5. This
region was chosen because it was suitable for search
by side-looking sonar and had not been searched be-
fore. We assumed a 0.90 probability of detection in
the searched region. This represents a conservative,
subjective estimate of the probability of this sensor
10 STONE, KELLER, KRATZKE AND STRUMPFER
Fig. 6. Regions searched by active side-looking sonar in April–May 2010.
detecting a ﬁeld of debris. The detection of small
items such as oil drums on the ocean bottom con-
ﬁrmed that the sensor was working well. We com-
puted the posterior after this search eﬀort by setting
1 − pd(n) =
{ 0.1, if xn is located in the
search rectangle,
1, otherwise.
(4.2)
This 1 − pd(n) was used in ( 4.1) with wn = w2
n to
compute w3
n and the posterior distribution ˜P123.
4.5 Step 4: Active Side-Looking Sonar Search in
April and May 2010
Figure 6 shows the regions searched during 2010
with active side-looking sonar. The search began in
the rectangular region recommended by [ 6] inside
the 40 NM circle and proceeded to the remainder of
the areas shown in medium gray including a small
rectangular region southwest of the last known po-
sition. As with the previous active sonar search,
we estimated that within these regions the search
sensors achieved detection probability 0.9. We felt
this was a conservative subjective estimate based
on the careful execution of the search, the quality
of sonar records and the numerous small articles de-
tected during this search. The search region was rep-
resented by a rectangular and a polygonal region.
As with the active sonar search in 2009, we com-
puted 1 − pd(n) in the manner given in ( 4.2) with
the rectangular and polygonal search regions replac-
ing the rectangle of the 2009 search. This produced
the desired posterior ˜P1234 which accounts for all the
unsuccessful search.
4.6 Posterior After the Unsuccessful Searches in
Steps 1–4
Figure 7 shows the posterior after the unsuccess-
ful searches in steps 1–4. Even though this poste-
rior allows for the possibility that the beacons did
not work, doubts about the beacons compelled us to
SEARCH FOR AIR FRANCE FLIGHT AF 447 11
Fig. 7. Posterior distrubtion ˜P1234.
produce the alternate posterior shown in Figure 8,
which assumes the beacons did not function. The lo-
cation of the wreckage which is shown in this ﬁgure
falls in a high probability area. This posterior dis-
tribution seems remarkably accurate and raises the
question of why the beacons were not detected.
The BEA recovered one data recorder with the
beacon attached. Testing by the BEA showed that
when the beacon was connected to a fully charged
battery, it did not produce a signal. This indicates
that the beacons were damaged in the crash and did
not function. This would explain why the beacons
were not detected by the passive acoustic search.
A better way to handle the doubts that we had
about the beacons would have been to compute a
joint distribution on beacon failure and wreck loca-
tion. The marginal distribution on wreck location
would then be the appropriate posterior on which
to base further search.
5. CONCLUSIONS
Figure 8 shows that the wreckage is located in
a high probability area assuming the beacons failed
to operate properly. Because the wreckage is located
in an area thoroughly covered by the passive search
(see Figure 5), these results and the tests of the re-
covered beacon by the BEA suggest that both bea-
cons failed to actuate. It appears that the likely fail-
ure of the beacons to actuate resulted in a long and
diﬃcult search.
The approach described in this paper used a care-
ful and methodical consideration of all data avail-
able with their associated uncertainties, to form an
analytic assessment of the highest likelihood areas
for future search eﬀorts. The weighted scenario ap-
proach allowed inconsistent information to be com-
bined with subjective weights that capture the con-
ﬁdence in the data. The analysis of the detection ef-
fectiveness of each search component produced the
Bayesian posterior distributions shown in Figures 7
and 8 and formed a solid basis for planning the next
increment of search. In fact, the 2011 search com-
menced in the center of the distribution and quickly
found the wreckage.
Failure to use a Bayesian approach in planning the
2010 search delayed the discovery of the wreckage by
up to one year. The success of the analysis described
in this paper provides a powerful illustration of the
12 STONE, KELLER, KRATZKE AND STRUMPFER
Fig. 8. Posterior distribution which assumes both beacons failed; produced because of doubts about the survivability of the
beacons.
value of a methodical, Bayesian approach to search
planning. The full report of this work is available on
the BEA website in [ 10].
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
We thank Joseph B. Kadane for his helpful com-
ments and suggestions.
REFERENCES
[1] Breivik, Ø. , Allen, A. A. , Maisondieu, C. and
Roth, J. C. (2011). Wind-induced drift of objects
at sea: The leeway ﬁeld method. Applied Ocean Re-
search 33 100–109.
[2] DeGroot, M. H. (2004). Optimal Statistical Decisions .
Wiley, Hoboken, NJ. MR2288194
[3] Koopman, B. O. (1956). The theory of search. I. Kine-
matic bases. Oper. Res. 4 324–346. MR0081814
[4] Koopman, B. O. (1956). The theory of search. II. Target
detection. Oper. Res. 4 503–531. MR0090467
[5] Kratzke, T. M. , Stone, L. D. and Frost, J. R.
(2010). Search and rescue optimal planning system.
In Proceedings of the 13th International Confer-
ence on Information Fusion (FUSION), Edinburgh,
Scotland, 26–29 July, 2010 1–8. IEEE.
[6] Ollitrault, M. (2010). Estimating the Wreckage Loca-
tion of the Rio–Paris AF447. Technical report, from
the Drift Group to BEA.
[7] Richardson, H. R. and Stone, L. D. (1971). Oper-
ations analysis during the underwater search for
Scorpion. Naval Research Logistics Quarterly 18
141–157.
[8] Stone, L. D. (1992). Search for the SS Central America:
Mathematical Treasure Hunting. Interfaces 22 32–
54.
[9] Stone, L. D. (2004). Theory of Optimal Search , 2nd ed.
INFORMS, Catonsville, MD.
[10] Stone, L. D. , Keller, C. M. , Kratzke, T. M. and
Strumpfer, J. P. (2011). Search Analysis for the
Location of the AF447. Technical report, BEA.
[11] Troadec, J.-P. (2011). Undersea search operations to
ﬁnd the wreckage of the A 330, ﬂight AF 447: the
culmination of extensive searches. Technical report,
note from BEA Director.