Efficient Localization of
Directional Emitters via Joint
Beampattern Estimation
FRASER WILLIAMS , Student Member, IEEE
Queensland University of Technology, Brisbane, Australia
Revolution Aerospace Pty Ltd, Brisbane, Australia
AKILA PEMASIRI
Queensland University of Technology, Brisbane, Australia
DHAMMIKA JAYALATH , Senior Member, IEEE
Queensland University of Technology, Brisbane, Australia
TERRENCE MARTIN
Revolution Aerospace Pty Ltd, Brisbane, Australia
CLINTON FOOKES , Senior Member, IEEE
Queensland University of Technology, Brisbane, Australia
Abstract—The localization of directional RF emitters presents
significant challenges for electronic warfare applications. Tradi-
tional localization methods, designed for omnidirectional emitters,
experience degraded performance when applied to directional
sources due to pronounced received signal strength (RSS) mod-
ulations introduced by directive beampatterns. This paper presents
a robust direct position determination (DPD) approach that jointly
estimates emitter position and beampattern parameters by incorpo-
rating RSS modulation from both path attenuation and directional
gain alongside angle of arrival (AOA) and time difference of arrival
(TDOA) information. To address the computational challenge of
joint optimization over position and beampattern parameters, we
develop an alternating maximization algorithm that decomposes
the four-dimensional search into efficient iterative two-dimensional
optimizations using a generalized beampattern model. Cram ´er-
Rao Lower Bound (CRLB) analysis establishes theoretical perfor-
mance limits, and numerical simulations demonstrate substantial
Manuscript received XXXXX 00, 0000; revised XXXXX 00, 0000;
accepted XXXXX 00, 0000.
The research for this paper received funding support from Revolution
Aerospace Pty Ltd and the Queensland Government through Trusted
Autonomous Systems (TAS), a Defence Cooperative Research Centre
funded through the Commonwealth Next Generation Technologies Fund
and the Queensland Government. Claude Sonnet 4.5 (Anthropic) was
used for editing and grammar enhancement throughout the manuscript.
(Corresponding author: F . Williams).
Authors’ addresses: F. Williams is with the School of Electrical Engi-
neering and Robotics, Queensland University of Technology, Brisbane,
QLD 4000, Australia, and also with Revolution Aerospace Pty Ltd,
Brisbane, QLD, Australia (e-mail: fraser.williams@hdr.qut.edu.au). A.
Pemasiri, D. Jayalath, and C. Fookes are with the School of Electrical
Engineering and Robotics, Queensland University of Technology, Bris-
bane, QLD 4000, Australia (e-mail: a.thondilege@qut.edu.au; dham-
mika.jayalath@qut.edu.au; c.fookes@qut.edu.au). T. Martin is with
Revolution Aerospace Pty Ltd, Brisbane, QLD, Australia (e-mail:
terry@revn.aero).
0018-9251 © YYYY IEEE
improvements over conventional methods. At -10 dB SNR, the
proposed approach achieves 49% to 61% error reduction compared
to AOA-TDOA baselines, with performance approaching the CRLB
above -10 dB. The algorithm converges rapidly, requiring 3 to
4 iterations on average, and exhibits robustness to beampattern
model mismatch. A contrast-expanded half-power uncertainty met-
ric is introduced to quantify localization confidence, revealing that
the proposed method produces concentrated unimodal likelihood
surfaces while conventional approaches generate spurious peaks.
Sensitivity analysis demonstrates that optimal performance occurs
when receivers are positioned at beampattern main lobe edges where
RSS gradients are maximized.
Index Terms—Array processing, direct position determination,
emitter localization, received signal strength, directional emitter
Notation
Vectors and matrices are represented by bold lower-
case and upper-case respectively. Notation includes ˜(·)for
the discrete Fourier transform (DFT),∥·∥for thel 2 norm,
(·)T for transpose,(·) ∗ for conjugate,(·) H for Hermitian
(conjugate transpose),≜for definition, diag{·}for the
vector to diagonal matrix operator,⊗for the Kronecker
product,(·)† for the Moore-Penrose inverse, andE[·]for
expectation.
I. Introduction
The passive localization of radio frequency (RF) emit-
ters constitutes a fundamental capability in applications
spanning navigation [1], telecommunications, and elec-
tronic warfare [2]. This typically requires correlating mea-
surements from multiple spatially distributed receivers
according to an a priori model of signal transformations
[3]. These measurements include time difference of arrival
(TDOA) [1], angle of arrival (AOA) derived through
beamforming [3], [4], frequency difference of arrival
(FDOA) based on Doppler shift [5], [6], and received
signal strength (RSS) from propagation loss [2], [7].
RSS-based approaches are particularly valuable for low
size, weight, and power (SWaP) implementations due to
their minimal hardware requirements [8], which enables
deployment on compact, mobile platforms.
Signal propagation introduces various transformations
that affect received signal strength, including channel
effects such as path loss, shadowing, and multipath reflec-
tions [9]. While these effects are widely recognized, many
contemporary localization techniques fail to account for
another significant factor: the directional emission charac-
teristics of the source [10]. Modern radio-based systems
frequently employ directional transmission to enhance
performance in applications such as long-distance com-
munications, spatial multiplexing, radar operations, and
electronic countermeasures [11], [12]. In these systems,
transmissions are modulated by beampatterns resulting
from directive antennas or phased arrays. Consequently,
localization approaches that assume omnidirectional emis-
sions encounter substantial localization errors driven by
unmodeled RSS variations across receivers [10]. Limited
approaches have been presented in the literature to ad-
IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON AEROSPACE AND ELECTRONIC SYSTEMS VOL. XX, No. XX XXXXX YYYY 1
arXiv:2411.04364v4  [eess.SP]  29 Oct 2025
dress directional emitters, such as [10] which assumes
a priori knowledge of emitter beamwidth. However, this
assumption is unsatisfactory due to the strong sensitivity
of localization performance to beamwidth and orientation
errors, as demonstrated through our Cram ´er-Rao Lower
Bound (CRLB) analysis in this work.
Recent research in direct position determination
(DPD), which directly incorporates signal measurements
into a physics-based model via a maximum-likelihood
estimation (MLE) approach, has demonstrated improved
localization at low signal to noise ratio (SNR) by incorpo-
rating path loss into the transformation model [13]. Build-
ing on this foundation, we extend the DPD framework
to account for directional emission by jointly estimating
the emitter’s position and beampattern parameters. Since
emitters can employ arbitrary beampatterns, we introduce
a generalized beampattern model that captures main lobe
characteristics through two parameters: orientationϕand
half-power beamwidthβ. This model provides sufficient
fidelity for effective localization while maintaining com-
putational tractability.
The introduction of beampattern parameters increases
the optimization search space from two dimensions (posi-
tion) to four dimensions (position plus beampattern), ren-
dering exhaustive grid search computationally prohibitive
for real-time applications. To address this challenge, we
develop an alternating maximization algorithm that de-
composes the joint optimization into efficient iterative
two-dimensional searches over position and beampattern
subspaces. This approach reduces computational com-
plexity while maintaining near-optimal performance, as
validated through comparison with theoretical CRLB.
The principal contributions of this work are:
•A generalized beampattern model that captures di-
rectional emission characteristics through orientation
and beamwidth parameters, enabling tractable joint
estimation within the DPD framework.
•CRLB analysis quantifying the fundamental limits of
directional emitter localization and revealing that op-
timal receiver placement occurs at beampattern main
lobe edges where RSS gradients are maximized.
•An efficient alternating maximization algorithm that
reduces the four-dimensional joint optimization to
iterative two-dimensional searches, achieving rapid
convergence (3-4 iterations) across SNR conditions.
•A contrast-expanded half-power uncertainty met-
ric for quantifying spatial localization confidence,
demonstrating that joint beampattern estimation
eliminates spurious peaks present in conventional
methods.
•Comprehensive simulation results demonstrating
49% to 61% error reduction compared to conven-
tional AOA-TDOA methods at -10 dB SNR, with
performance approaching the CRLB above -10 dB
SNR.
Simulation results across representative directional
communications and radar scenarios validate the ap-
proach, demonstrating robustness to beampattern model
mismatch when the true emitter employs realistic antenna
patterns with sidelobes.
The remainder of this paper is organized as follows.
Section II formulates the directional emitter localiza-
tion problem and introduces the generalized beampattern
model. Section III derives the CRLB for position esti-
mation. Section IV presents the iterative DPD algorithm.
Section V evaluates performance through Monte Carlo
simulations. Section VI concludes the paper with discus-
sion of future research directions.
II. Problem Formulation
Consider a stationary directional emitter, andLspa-
tially distributed receivers each equipped with a uniform
linear array (ULA) havingMelements. The signal re-
ceived by thelth receiver is given by
rl(t) =b ldl(p,ψ)al(p)s(t−τ l(p)−t 0) +nl(t),(1)
wherer l(t)is theM×1received signal vector at
timet,b l is the complex channel attenuation factor,
p= [x,y] T is the emitter position,d l(p,ψ)is the direc-
tional path attenuation incorporating beampattern effects,
ψ= [ϕ,β] T is the beampattern parameter vector where
ϕis the emitter orientation andβis the emitter main-
lobe beamwidth in radians,a l(p)is the receiver steering
vector,s(t−τ l(p)−t 0)is the signal waveform at timet
transmitted att 0, delayed byτ l(p), andn l(t)represents
noise at thelth receiver.
In order to study the effect of directional emitters
we propose to approximate the emitter beampattern by a
generic function. The function should be even, smooth,
periodic, and with defined half-power beamwidth. We
propose
gl(p,ψ) =e
α(β)
h
cos

θ(t)
l (p)−ϕ

−1
i
(2)
α(β)≜− log(2)/2
cos(β/2)−1 ,(3)
whereβis the half-power beamwidth ofg l in radians,
andθ (t)
l (p)is the angle from the transmitter to thelth
receiver. The transmit angle is given by
θ(t)
l (p) =tan -1 (yl−y,x l−x)(4)
where tan -1 is the quadrant-aware arc-tangent function
and thelth receiver position isu l = [xl,yl]. The gen-
eralized beampattern model is visualized in Fig. 1.
The directional path attenuationd l(p,ψ)is given by
dl(p,ψ) = κl
∥p−u l∥gl(p,ψ),(5)
κl ≜
s
PTG0GRλ2
(4π)2Ll
,(6)
whereκ l represents all position-independent parameters,
PT the transmit power,G 0 the peak gain of the emitter,
GR the gain of an individual antenna element,λthe radio
wavelength,L l system losses such as filter insertion loss,
ul the position of thelth receiver,∥p−u l∥the distance
2 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON AEROSPACE AND ELECTRONIC SYSTEMS VOL. XX, No. XX XXXXX YYYY
−150 −100 −50 0 50 100 150
Angle θ(t)
l (°)
0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1
Beampattern Gain |gl(p,ψ)|2 Proposed β=30°
Norm. ULA M =4
Half-power
Fig. 1. Generalized beampattern model withϕ= 0° andβ= 30°
compared to a 4-element ULA. Vertical dashed lines show the
half-power beamwidth points, with crosses falling on the intersections
with the model.
between emitter and receiver, andg l(p,ψ)the directional
beampattern defined in (2). It is possible to calibrate
receivers such thatκ l is constant across receivers through
compensation ofL l.
The receiver steering vector is anM×1vector with
mth element
[al(p)]m =e
−j2π (m−1)∆
λ cos

θ(r)
l (p)

,(7)
for1≤m≤M,
θ(r)
l (p) =tan -1(y−y l,x−x l),(8)
where∆is the physical separation between antenna
elements,λis the wavelength of the radio signal, and
θ(r)
l (p)is angle from thelth receiver to the positionp.
The propagation delay is given by
τl(p) =∥p−u l∥
c ,(9)
wherecis the speed of light in a vacuum.
Expressing (1) in frequency domain we have
˜rl,k =b ldl(p,ψ)al(p)˜ske−jωk[τl(p)+t0] + ˜nl,k,(10)
ωk ≜ 2π(k−1)
NT ,for1≤k≤N,(11)
whereNis the number of signal samples,Tis the sam-
pling period,kis the discrete frequency bin, and˜s k and
˜nl,k are the Fourier coefficients ofs(t)andn(t)forming
the vectors ˜s= [˜s 1,...,˜s N]T and ˜n= [ ˜n1,..., ˜nN]T
respectively.
To maximize clarity we define the following
˜nk ≜[ ˜nT
1,k,..., ˜nL,k]T (12)
ak,l(p,ψ)≜d l(p,ψ)e−jωkτl(p)al(p)(13)
ak(p,ψ)≜[a k,1(p,ψ)T,...,a k,L(p,ψ)T ]T (14)
˜rk ≜[ ˜rT
1,k,..., ˜rT
L,k]T (15)
b≜[b 1,...,b L]T (16)
Λk(p,ψ)≜diag(a k(p,ψ))(17)
H≜I L⊗1M (18)
ck(p,ψ)≜Λ k(p,ψ)Hb,(19)
whereI L is theL×Lidentity matrix and1 M is anM×1
vector of ones.
The received signal is then given by
˜rk =c k(p,ψ)˜sk + ˜nk.(20)
We wish to estimate the emitter positionpusing the
observations of (20).
III. Cram ´er-Rao Lower Bound
We derive the Cram ´er-Rao Lower Bound (CRLB)
for position estimation, which provides the minimum
variance achievable by any unbiased estimator under our
signal model.
A. Fisher Information Matrix
Noise is assumed to be drawn from the complex Gaus-
sian distribution ˜nk ∼ CN(0,σ2
n). The log-likelihood
function of the observed signal is
lnP( ˜r) =−MLNlog
 
πσ 2
n

− 1
σ2n
NX
k=1
∥˜rk−ck(p,ψ)˜sk∥2.(21)
The Fisher information matrix is given by
J=−E
∂2 lnP( ˜r)
∂ζ 2

(22)
where the vectorζcontains all unknown parameters
ζ≜[p,ϵ],(23)
ϵ≜[ψ T,bT, ˜sT ].(24)
The FIM has the partitioned structure
Jζζ = 2
σ2n

Jpp Jpϵ
Jϵp Jϵϵ

,(25)
where sub-blocksJ ζiζj are computed from partial deriva-
tives of the mean signal model
µk =c k(p,ψ)˜sk (26)
with respect to the parameters. These derivatives involve
positionp, beampattern parametersψ, channel attenua-
tionb, and signal samples ˜s. The detailed derivations of
all partial derivatives are provided in Appendix A.
B. Position Bound
Using the partitioned matrix inversion formula [14],
the CRLB for position can be extracted from the full FIM
by
CRLBp = σ2
n
2

Jpp−JpϵJ−1
ϵϵ Jϵp
−1
.(27)
The scalar position error bound is then
σp =
p
tr(CRLBp).(28)
The derived CRLB accounts for the directional nature
of the emitter through incorporation of the beampattern
parametersψin the signal model. This enables theoretical
WILLIAMS ET AL.: EFFICIENT LOCALIZATION OF DIRECTIONAL EMITTERS 3
performance analysis that captures the RSS modulation
due to emitter directivity.
In Section V, we compare our proposed approach
against this bound to demonstrate its efficiency in exploit-
ing directional information for improved localization.
IV. Directional Emitter Localization Algorithm
In this section we develop a directional emitter-aware
DPD cost function for localization.
A. Cost Function
Following the standard maximum likelihood approach,
we minimize the negative log-likelihood function (21),
which is equivalent to minimizing
Q(p,ψ) =
NX
k=1
∥˜rk−ck(p,ψ)˜sk∥2.(29)
For unknown signals, eliminating the nuisance pa-
rameter˜sk through standard manipulations yields the
equivalent maximization problem
˜Q(p,ψ) =
NX
k=1
ck(p,ψ)H ˜rk
2
ck(p,ψ)Hck(p,ψ) .(30)
Expanding (30) using (19) and the sample covariance
matrix
Rk ≜ ˜rk ˜rH
k ,(31)
the cost function takes the Rayleigh quotient form
˜Q(p,ψ) =b HA(p,ψ)b,(32)
where
A(p,ψ) =H H
PN
k=1 Λk(p,ψ)HRkΛk(p,ψ)
∥γ(p,ψ)∥ 2 H,(33)
γ(p,ψ)≜[d 1(p,ψ),...,d L(p,ψ)].(34)
The standard approach to maximizing (32) under the
constraint∥b∥ 2 =Lis to estimatebas the principal
eigenvector ofA(p,ψ), yielding ˜Q(p,ψ) =λ max(A).
However, this eigenvalue-based approach is problematic
for RSS-based localization of directional emitters. Under
practical conditions, it tends to allocate higher values of
bl to receivers experiencing stronger signals (those within
the main lobe) and lower values to receivers with weaker
signals. This creates a systematic bias that effectively
“flattens” the perceived beampattern, severely degrading
the algorithm’s ability to accurately estimate the emitter’s
beampattern parametersψ, which are critical for precise
localization of directive emitters [8].
To address this, we instead normalize by constraining
each channel coefficient to unity:
bl = 1.(35)
This choice preserves the RSS variations due to beam-
pattern and path attenuation while avoiding the systematic
bias introduced by eigenvalue-based estimation. Under
(35), the cost function simplifies to
˜Q(p,ψ) =
NX
k=1
ak(p,ψ)H
∥γ(p,ψ)∥ Rk
ak(p,ψ)
∥γ(p,ψ)∥ ,(36)
wherea k(p,ψ)is defined in (14).
To enhance robustness and resolution, we apply the
minimum variance distortionless response (MVDR) trans-
formation [15] to (36), yielding
˜Qenh(p,ψ) =
NX
k=1
ak(p,ψ)H
∥γ(p,ψ)∥ R−1
k
ak(p,ψ)
∥γ(p,ψ)∥
−1
.
(37)
We employ MVDR beamforming due to its supe-
rior spatial discrimination, which is particularly critical
for directional emitter localization, although other high-
resolution techniques such as MUSIC [16], ESPRIT [17],
or enhanced eigenspace methods [18] could equally be
applied. The highly non-uniform RSS distribution across
receivers, induced by the emitter’s beampattern, creates
ambiguities that benefit from the superior spatial selec-
tivity offered by high-resolution techniques. The matched
filter approach in (36) tends to produce broad spatial
responses that can conflate beampattern effects with mul-
tipath or sidelobe interference, whereas enhanced tech-
niques’ adaptive nulling capability sharpens the likelihood
surface, enabling more reliable joint estimation of position
and beampattern parameters, particularly at low SNR.
The emitter position and beampattern parameters are
then estimated by
( ˆp, ˆψ) =arg max
p,ψ
˜Qenh(p,ψ).(38)
This concludes the derivation of the directional emitter
DPD cost function.
B. Reduced Computation
When beampattern parametersψare known, equation
(38) reduces to a standard2-dimensional grid search
over positionp. However, joint estimation of position
and beampattern requires a4-dimensional search, which
becomes computationally prohibitive due to the expo-
nential growth in grid size. The computational burden
is further exacerbated for highly directive emitters with
small beamwidthβ, where fine angular resolution is
required to accurately resolve the orientationϕ.
The natural decomposition of (38) into positionp=
[x,y]T and beampatternψ= [ϕ,β] T subproblems is mo-
tivated by their distinct physical roles and computational
structure. Position determines the spatial geometry (the
time delays and array manifold vectorsa l(p)in (14)),
while beampattern parameters govern the relative signal
strength distribution across receivers throughγ(p,ψ)in
(34). This separation is evident in the cost function struc-
ture (36): given a fixed position, beampattern estimation
reduces to matching the observed amplitude profile across
receivers, a lower-dimensional problem dominated by
4 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON AEROSPACE AND ELECTRONIC SYSTEMS VOL. XX, No. XX XXXXX YYYY
the directional gain pattern. Conversely, given a fixed
beampattern, position estimation becomes a spatial lo-
calization problem driven by phase coherence across
array elements and time-delay geometry. Furthermore, the
parameter spaces are fundamentally different: position is
continuous Cartesian, while orientation is periodic angular
and beamwidth is a positive scale parameter, suggesting
they are best optimized in separate coordinate blocks. This
motivates an alternating maximization (AM) approach
that iteratively optimizes each parameter subset while
holding the other fixed, as detailed in Algorithm 1.
Algorithm 1Alternating Maximization for Joint Position
and Beampattern Estimation
Input:Received signals{r l}L
l=1, receiver positions
{ul}L
l=1, initial beampatternψ 0, convergence
thresholdε
Output:Estimated position ˆpand beampattern ˆψ
// Initialize position with wide beampattern assumption
ˆp←arg max p ˜Qenh(p,ψ 0)
ˆψ←ψ 0
∆←∞
while∆>εdo
ˆpprev← ˆp
// Fix position, optimize beampattern
ˆψ←arg max ψ ˜Qenh( ˆp,ψ)
// Fix beampattern, optimize position
ˆp←arg max p ˜Qenh(p, ˆψ)
∆←
 ˆp− ˆpprev

return ˆp, ˆψ
The alternating maximization structure provides the-
oretical convergence guarantees: each iteration performs
coordinate-wise maximization of ˜Qenh(p,ψ), yielding a
monotonically non-decreasing sequence of objective val-
ues{ ˜Qi}I
i=1 where ˜Qi ≤ ˜Qi+1. Since the objective
function is bounded above, the sequence converges to a
stationary point of ˜Qenh(p,ψ)[19]. While convergence to
the global maximum is not guaranteed due to the non-
convex nature of the problem, the separable structure
of the subproblems (spatial geometry versus amplitude
distribution) reduces the likelihood of poor local minima
compared to simultaneous optimization.
The quality of the solution is influenced by initializa-
tion: we initialize with a coarse position estimate assum-
ing a wide beampatternψ 0, effectively treating the emitter
as quasi-omnidirectional, which provides a robust starting
point that avoids directional ambiguities. This initializa-
tion strategy exploits the observation that position esti-
mation is less sensitive to beampattern misspecification
when the assumed pattern is wide, whereas beampattern
estimation requires accurate position knowledge. Section
V empirically validates this approach, demonstrating rapid
convergence (typically fewer than 3 iterations even at
low SNR) with the algorithm consistently achieving near-
CRLB performance at moderate SNR levels.
V. Simulation Results
A. Experimental Design
We investigate the performance of the proposed al-
gorithm through Monte Carlo simulations of two rep-
resentative scenarios for directional emitters: directional
communications and radar. To evaluate the localization
performance we study the mean distance error given by
the Euclidean distance between the estimated and true
position of the emitter. To evaluate the uncertainty of the
localization heatmaps, whose behavior deviates from the
case of omnidirectional emitters, we define a contrast-
expanded half-power uncertainty metric. This metric first
normalizes all cost function values across the search grid
to span the range[0,1]by applying the transformation
Qnorm(p,ψ) = [Q(p,ψ)−min(Q)]/[max(Q)−min(Q)],
then measures the spatial area (in m 2) of grid cells
whereQ norm(p,ψ)>0.5. This normalization ensures
that the half-power threshold is consistently defined rel-
ative to the full dynamic range of each individual cost
function, enabling fair comparison across different SNR
levels and methods with varying absolute cost function
magnitudes. For robust localization, we expect the half-
power uncertainty to be proportional to the mean distance
error, as both metrics should decrease consistently when
localization improves. We further investigate the effect
of beampattern mismatch between the proposed gener-
alized model and realistic beampatterns. The sensitivity
of the localization to small changes in beamwidth and
orientation are then studied via the CRLB. As a baseline,
we compare against the traditional AOA TDOA-based
DPD method [3] which does not account for directional
emission patterns.
Both scenarios share the following simulation param-
eters. The channel attenuation for each receiver is given
byb l∼CN(1,0.1 2). The noise varianceσ 2
n is equal at
all receivers. Since the noise variance is equal across
all receivers while the received signal strength varies
due to beampattern and path attenuation, each receiver
experiences different SNR. The best-case SNR (at the
receiver with the strongest signal) is varied between−15
and0dB in steps of1dB.L= 4receivers are simulated,
distributed at positionsu 1 = [−2500,−2500],u 2 =
[−2500,2500],u 3 = [2500,−2500],u 4 = [2500,2500]m,
each equipped with anM= 4element ULA, capturing
N= 32samples with sampling frequency200kHz.
The exhaustive grid search is performed with25m grid
resolution,1° orientation resolution, and10° beamwidth
resolution between10° and90°. We perform250Monte
Carlo trials, filtering the top and bottom5%of distance
errors to prevent disproportionate effects on mean error
calculations.
Fig. 2a presents the experimental setup for the direc-
tional communication scenario, where the emitter is posi-
tioned atp= [600,600]m, having orientationϕ=−10°
to the horizontal and half-power beamwidthβ= 30°. This
scenario represents a typical communications geometry
WILLIAMS ET AL.: EFFICIENT LOCALIZATION OF DIRECTIONAL EMITTERS 5
x(km)
y(km)
E ϕ=−10°
R2
R1
R4
R3
β= 30°
(a)Directional communication experiment.
x(km)
y(km)E
ϕ=−70°
R2
R1
R4
R3
β= 30°
(b)Radar experiment.
Fig. 2. Experimental setup including position of the emitter, its
orientation and beamwidth, and the position of the receivers.
where only a subset of receivers are illuminated by the
emitter’s main lobe.
Fig. 2b presents the radar scenario, where the emitter
is located outside the receiver array atp= [−4000,4000]
m, oriented atϕ=−70° to the horizontal with beamwidth
β= 30°. This geometry represents a standoff radar
scenario where the emitter illuminates the receiver array
from an oblique angle.
B. Nominal Localization
We evaluate the proposed algorithm’s performance
under nominal conditions where the signal model matches
the generalized beampattern of (2). We first examine
the spatial distribution of likelihood values through cost
function heatmaps, then quantify localization accuracy
and uncertainty metrics across SNR.
Fig. 3 presents qualitative comparison between local-
ization methods at 0 dB SNR. The traditional AOA TDOA
method [3] produces broad likelihood surfaces with mul-
tiple spurious peaks (secondary maxima displaced from
the true emitter location) in both scenarios, a conse-
quence of ignoring the RSS modulation introduced by the
directional beampattern. The MVDR baseline provides
improved spatial resolution through adaptive beamform-
ing, but assumes omnidirectional emission and thus still
exhibits significant spatial ambiguity. In contrast, the pro-
posed method produces sharply concentrated likelihood
surfaces centered on the true emitter location, effectively
eliminating spurious peaks by jointly estimating position
and beampattern parameters, which correctly accounts for
the directional RSS modulation.
To quantify these qualitative observations, we analyze
mean distance error and spatial uncertainty across SNR.
Fig. 4 presents localization performance from -15 dB
to 0 dB SNR. The proposed method demonstrates sub-
stantially improved performance compared to baselines
that do not jointly estimate beampattern parameters. For
the directional communications experiment (Fig. 4a), the
proposed method approaches the CRLB above -10 dB,
achieving 1071 m mean distance error at -10 dB: a
49.0% reduction compared to 2100 m for AOA TDOA
and a 46.7% reduction compared to 2008 m for MVDR.
These improvements are particularly pronounced at low
SNR, where the joint estimation framework effectively
leverages the additional information contained in the
beampattern-modulated RSS distribution. The radar sce-
nario (Fig. 4b) exhibits similar trends, with the proposed
method achieving 1468 m at -10 dB versus 3782 m (AOA
TDOA) and 3434 m (MVDR), representing 61.2% and
57.3% error reductions respectively.
The contrast-expanded half-power uncertainty metric
is presented in Fig. 5. The proposed technique maintains
an approximately proportional relationship between un-
certainty and mean distance error across both scenarios,
with uncertainty decreasing monotonically as SNR im-
proves, the expected behavior for a well-posed localiza-
tion problem. In contrast, the AOA TDOA baseline ex-
hibits counterintuitive behavior: increasing uncertainty at
high SNR despite improved position accuracy. This occurs
because the cost function produces multiple distinct peaks
(spurious maxima displaced from the true location, visible
in Fig. 3a and 3d), which collectively increase the spatial
area exceeding the half-power threshold even as the global
maximum sharpens. The proposed method eliminates
these spurious peaks by jointly estimating beampattern
parameters, producing concentrated unimodal likelihood
surfaces that yield both low error and low uncertainty.
These results demonstrate that joint estimation of position
and beampattern parameters is essential for robust local-
ization of directional emitters, providing both improved
accuracy and reduced spatial ambiguity compared to
methods that assume omnidirectional emission.
C. Iteration Convergence
The iterative nature of the proposed algorithm de-
mands consideration of convergence properties. In Section
B we argue theoretical convergence. In this section the
practical number of iterations required for convergence
6 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON AEROSPACE AND ELECTRONIC SYSTEMS VOL. XX, No. XX XXXXX YYYY
AOA TDOA MVDR Proposed
Directional Comms.
(a)
 (b)
 (c)
Radar
(d)
 (e)
 (f)
Fig. 3. Heatmaps comparing localization methods for directional communications and radar experiments at SNR =0dB,N= 32,M= 4.
Grids measure6km×6km. Superimposed white symbols represent receiver positions, and the red cross represents the true emitter position.
Note the multiple spurious peaks in AOA TDOA, reduced ambiguity in MVDR, and sharp unimodal response in the proposed method.
−14 −12 −10 −8 −6 −4 −2 0
SNR (dB)
0
500
1000
1500
2000
2500Mean Distance Error (m)
AOA-TDOA
MVDR
Proposed
CRLB
(a)Directional communication experiment.
−14 −12 −10 −8 −6 −4 −2 0
SNR (dB)
0
1000
2000
3000
4000
5000
6000Mean Distance Error (m)
AOA-TDOA
MVDR
Proposed
CRLB (b)Radar experiment.
Fig. 4. Localization mean distance error vs SNR for the directional communications and radar experiments.
is presented, which may increase by the difficulty of the
localization problem.
Fig. 6 presents the mean number of iterations over
all trials for each SNR until meeting the convergence
criteria for the directional communication and radar ex-
periments respectively, when provided with an initial
position estimate. At -10 dB SNR, 3.34 iterations are
required for the directional communications scenario and
3.45 iterations for the radar scenario, with convergence
improving as SNR increases to 0 dB. This demonstrates
that the proposed algorithm converges efficiently in prac-
tical scenarios.
WILLIAMS ET AL.: EFFICIENT LOCALIZATION OF DIRECTIONAL EMITTERS 7
−14 −12 −10 −8 −6 −4 −2 0
SNR (dB)
2
3
4
5
6Mean Uncertainty (m2)
×106
AOA-TDOA
MVDR
Proposed
(a)Directional communication experiment.
−14 −12 −10 −8 −6 −4 −2 0
SNR (dB)
0
2
4
6Mean Uncertainty (m2)
×106
AOA-TDOA
MVDR
Proposed (b)Radar experiment.
Fig. 5. Contrast-expanded half-power uncertainty (m 2) versus SNR. The proposed method exhibits monotonically decreasing uncertainty, while
AOA TDOA shows increasing uncertainty at high SNR due to spurious peaks.
−14 −12 −10 −8 −6 −4 −2 0
SNR (dB)
1.0
1.5
2.0
2.5
3.0
3.5
Mean Iterations
Directive Comms
Directive Radar
Fig. 6. Mean number of iterations until convergence criteria was met
for the proposed algorithm in both the directional communications and
radar experiment.
D. Model Mismatch
The generalized beampattern model of (2) represents
only the main lobe of a directional emitter. As such, model
mismatch with realistic directional emitters is certain.
The effect of this mismatch is examined for both
the directional communications and radar experiments by
simulating the emitter beampattern as a 4-element ULA
as shown in Fig. 1. The presence of sidelobes and nulls
within the realistic beampattern may interfere with the
effective estimation of beampattern parametersϕandβ,
as significant mismatch occurs at these locations. The
localization experiments otherwise remain identical to the
nominal case.
The model mismatch localization performance is
demonstrated in Fig. 7. Despite the presence of side-
lobes and nulls in the realistic beampattern, the proposed
technique maintains superior performance compared to
baseline methods. For the directional communications
experiment (Fig. 7a), the proposed method achieves 643
m mean distance error at -10 dB, representing 64.0%
and 60.4% error reductions compared to 1787 m (AOA
TDOA) and 1622 m (MVDR) respectively. Notably, this
represents even better performance than the nominal case
(1071 m), suggesting that the sidelobe structure of the
realistic beampattern provides additional spatial informa-
tion that aids localization when receivers are positioned
appropriately. For the radar scenario (Fig. 7b), the pro-
posed technique achieves 1787 m at -10 dB compared to
4070 m (AOA TDOA) and 3752 m (MVDR), representing
56.1% and 52.4% error reductions respectively.
We examine the beampattern parameter estimation
step specifically in Fig. 8 for both experiments at 0 dB
SNR. The cost function surface reveals how well the
generalized model approximates the realistic ULA beam-
pattern. For the directional communication experiment
(Fig. 8a), the model mismatch shows little effect on the
estimate, with viable regions concentrated atβ= 30°
andβ= 40° beamwidths for orientations centered about
the true valueϕ=−10°. This demonstrates that the
generalized model successfully captures the main lobe
characteristics despite the presence of sidelobes. In con-
trast, the radar experiment (Fig. 8b) exhibits beampattern
ambiguity, with alternativeϕ-βpairs becoming viable.
While the true parameter pair (β= 30°,ϕ=−70°)
produces a peak in the cost function, a comparable peak
appears near (β= 30°,ϕ= 140°). Additionally, the
cost function broadens for larger beamwidths, indicating
that the sidelobe structure can be approximated by wider
main lobes in the generalized model. Despite this beam-
pattern ambiguity, the position estimation remains accu-
rate, demonstrating the robustness of the joint estimation
framework.
E. Beampattern Sensitivity
The localization performance depends critically on
accurate knowledge of the beampattern parametersϕand
β. To quantify this sensitivity, we analyze how the CRLB
varies when the true beampattern parameters deviate from
8 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON AEROSPACE AND ELECTRONIC SYSTEMS VOL. XX, No. XX XXXXX YYYY
−14 −12 −10 −8 −6 −4 −2 0
SNR (dB)
0
500
1000
1500
2000
2500Mean Distance Error (m)
AOA-TDOA
MVDR
Proposed
(a)Directional communications experiment.
−14 −12 −10 −8 −6 −4 −2 0
SNR (dB)
0
1000
2000
3000
4000
5000
6000Mean Distance Error (m)
AOA-TDOA
MVDR
Proposed (b)Radar experiment.
Fig. 7. Localization mean distance error versus SNR for model mismatch experiments. The emitter uses a realistic 4-element ULA
beampattern while the algorithm assumes the generalized model of (2).
−180 −120 −60 0 60 120 180
Orientation (deg)
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
80
90Beamwidth (deg)
(a)Directional communication experiment.
−180 −120 −60 0 60 120 180
Orientation (deg)
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
80
90Beamwidth (deg) (b)Radar experiment.
Fig. 8. Beampattern parameter cost function ˜Qenh( ˆp,ψ)at 0 dB SNR for model mismatch experiments, evaluated at the true position
ˆp=p true. Brighter regions indicate higher likelihood. The white cross marks the true beampattern parameters.
their nominal values, examining perturbations in orienta-
tion and beamwidth independently.
Fig. 9 presents CRLB sensitivity analysis for both
scenarios. The top row shows results for the directional
communications experiment, where only two of four
receivers are effectively illuminated by the narrow beam-
pattern.
For orientation sensitivity (Fig. 9a), the lowest CRLB
(best localization performance) occurs at the true value
ϕ=−10°, which preferentially illuminates the receiver
at[2500,−2500]m over the receiver at[2500,2500]m.
Interestingly,ϕ= 0° (which would equally illuminate
both receivers) exhibits higher CRLB than the optimal
ϕ=−10°. This seemingly counterintuitive result arises
from competing effects: while balanced illumination in-
creases the number of effective receivers, localization
performance is optimized when receivers are positioned
at the edge of the main lobe where small variations
inϕproduce maximum RSS gradient. Atϕ=−20°,
the beampattern no longer effectively illuminates both
receivers, causing significant CRLB degradation as spatial
diversity is lost.
For beamwidth sensitivity (Fig. 9b), the CRLB is
relatively stable near the nominalβ= 30° but degrades
for narrower beamwidths. This occurs because narrower
beampatterns reduce the number of effectively illuminated
receivers, decreasing the available spatial diversity for
localization.
The radar experiment (bottom row) presents a differ-
ent geometry where all four receivers are illuminated,
with receivers at[−2500,2500]m and[−2500,−2500]
m receiving stronger signals. The orientation sensitivity
(Fig. 9c) shows similar edge-of-lobe effects, while the
beamwidth sensitivity (Fig. 9d) demonstrates that decreas-
ing beamwidth belowβ= 30° causes significant CRLB
degradation even for minor perturbations, highlighting the
critical importance of RSS variation across receivers for
effective localization.
WILLIAMS ET AL.: EFFICIENT LOCALIZATION OF DIRECTIONAL EMITTERS 9
Orientation Sensitivity Beamwidth Sensitivity
Directional Comms.
−14 −12 −10 −8 −6 −4 −2 0
SNR (dB)
0
500
1000
1500RMS Distance Error (m)
CRLB φ = □20°
CRLB φ = □15°
CRLB φ = □10°
CRLB φ = □5°
CRLB φ = 0°
(a)Varyingϕwith fixedβ= 30°.
−14 −12 −10 −8 −6 −4 −2 0
SNR (dB)
0
100
200
300
400RMS Distance Error (m)
CRLB β = 20°
CRLB β = 25°
CRLB β = 30°
CRLB β = 35°
CRLB β = 40° (b)Varyingβwith fixedϕ=−10°.
Radar
−14 −12 −10 −8 −6 −4 −2 0
SNR (dB)
0
100
200
300
400
500RMS Distance Error (m)
CRLB φ = □80°
CRLB φ = □75°
CRLB φ = □70°
CRLB φ = □65°
CRLB φ = □60°
(c)Varyingϕwith fixedβ= 30°.
−14 −12 −10 −8 −6 −4 −2 0
SNR (dB)
0
100
200
300
400
500
600RMS Distance Error (m)
CRLB β = 20°
CRLB β = 25°
CRLB β = 30°
CRLB β = 35°
CRLB β = 40° (d)Varyingβwith fixedϕ=−70°.
Fig. 9. CRLB sensitivity to perturbations in beampattern parameters for the directional communications (top) and radar (bottom) experiments.
Left column: orientationϕvaried while beamwidth is fixed atβ= 30°. Right column: beamwidthβvaried while orientation is fixed at the true
value. Lower CRLB indicates better theoretical localization performance.
VI. Conclusion
This paper presents a robust direct position determina-
tion approach for localizing highly directional RF emitters
by jointly estimating position and beampattern parame-
ters. We extend the conventional DPD framework to incor-
porate directional emission effects through a generalized
beampattern model that captures main lobe characteristics
while remaining computationally tractable. To address the
computational challenge of joint 4-dimensional optimiza-
tion over positionp= [x,y] T and beampattern parameters
ψ= [ϕ,β] T , we develop an alternating maximization
algorithm that decomposes the problem into efficient
iterative 2-dimensional searches.
Numerical simulations across two representative sce-
narios demonstrate substantial performance improvements
compared to conventional methods that assume omni-
directional emission. At -10 dB SNR, the proposed
method achieves 1071 m mean distance error for the
directional communications scenario and 1468 m for the
radar scenario, representing 49.0% to 61.2% error reduc-
tions compared to AOA-TDOA baselines. Performance
approaches the Cram ´er-Rao Lower Bound above -10 dB
SNR, validating the theoretical efficiency of the approach.
The iterative algorithm converges rapidly, requiring only
3.34 to 3.45 iterations on average at -10 dB SNR.
We introduce a contrast-expanded half-power uncer-
tainty metric to quantify localization confidence, revealing
that the proposed method produces concentrated uni-
modal likelihood surfaces while baseline methods exhibit
multiple spurious peaks that inflate spatial uncertainty.
The approach demonstrates robustness to beampattern
model mismatch, maintaining superior performance even
when the true emitter uses a realistic ULA pattern with
sidelobes rather than the assumed generalized model.
Sensitivity analysis via CRLB perturbations reveals that
optimal localization occurs when receivers are positioned
at the edge of the main lobe where RSS gradients are
maximized, providing practical insights for receiver de-
ployment.
The results establish that joint estimation of position
and beampattern parameters is essential for effective
localization of directional emitters, particularly in low
SNR scenarios where conventional methods fail. Future
work could extend this framework to multi-emitter scenar-
ios, non-stationary platforms, and alternative beampattern
models for specific antenna types.
10 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON AEROSPACE AND ELECTRONIC SYSTEMS VOL. XX, No. XX XXXXX YYYY
Appendix A
CRLB Partial Derivatives
This appendix provides the detailed derivations of
partial derivatives required for computing the Fisher
Information Matrix in Section III. All derivatives
are computed for the observation modelµ l,k =
bldl(p,ψ)al(p)e−jωkτl(p)˜sk whereldenotes the receiver
index andkdenotes the frequency bin, andd l(p,ψ) =
κl
∥p−ul∥gl(p,ψ)as defined in the main text.
The partial derivatives for each receiver and frequency
bin are concatenated to form the complete gradient as
∂µk
∂ζi
=
"∂µ1,k
∂ζi
T
,...,
∂µL,k
∂ζi
T#T
.(39)
A. Position Derivatives
The position derivatives account for how the model
changes with emitter location:
∂µl,k
∂p = ∂
∂pbldl(p,ψ)al(p)e−jωkτl(p)˜sk (40)
=δ 1 +δ 2 +δ 3,(41)
where
δ1 ≜b l
∂dl(p,ψ)
∂p al(p)e−jωkτl(p)˜sk,(42)
δ2 ≜b ldl(p,ψ) ∂al(p)
∂p e−jωkτl(p)˜sk,(43)
δ3 ≜b ldl(p,ψ)al(p)∂e−jωkτl(p)
∂p ˜sk.(44)
The directional path attenuation gradient in (42)
is computed using the product rule ond l(p,ψ) =
κl
∥p−ul∥gl(p,ψ):
∂dl(p,ψ)
∂p = κl
∥p−u l∥
∂gl(p,ψ)
∂p +gl(p,ψ) ∂
∂p
 κl
∥p−u l∥

,
(45)
where the beampattern gradient is
∂gl(p,ψ)
∂p = ∂gl(p,ψ)
∂θ (t)
l (p)
∂θ (t)
l (p)
∂p ,(46)
∂gl(p,ψ)
∂θ (t)
l (p)
=−α(β) sin

θ(t)
l (p)−ϕ

gl(p,ψ),(47)
∂θ (t)
l (p)
∂p =
 yl−y
∥p−u l∥2,−(xl−x)
∥p−u l∥2

,(48)
and the geometric attenuation gradient is
∂
∂p
 κl
∥p−u l∥

=−κ l
p−u l
∥p−u l∥3.(49)
The steering vector gradient in (43) is
∂al(p)
∂p = ∂al(p)
∂θ (r)
l (p)
∂θ (r)
l (p)
∂p ,(50)
where
∂al,m(p)
∂θ (r)
l (p)
=j2π m∆
λ sin

θ(r)
l (p)

al,m(p)(51)
and
∂θ (r)
l (p)
∂p =
−(y−y l)
∥p−u l∥2, x−x l
∥p−u l∥2

.(52)
The propagation delay gradient in (44) is
∂e−jωkτl(p)
∂p =−jω ke−jωkτl(p)∂τl(p)
∂p (53)
=− 1
cjωke−jωkτl(p) p−u l
∥p−u l∥.(54)
B. Orientation Derivatives
The partial derivative with respect to beam orientation
ϕis
∂µl,k
∂ϕ =b l
∂dl(p,ψ)
∂ϕ al(p)e−jωkτl(p)˜sk,(55)
where
∂dl(p,ψ)
∂ϕ = κl
∥p−u l∥
∂gl(p,ψ)
∂ϕ ,(56)
∂gl(p,ψ)
∂ϕ =α(β) sin

θ(t)
l (p)−ϕ

gl(p,ψ).(57)
C. Beamwidth Derivatives
The partial derivative with respect to beamwidthβis
∂µl,k
∂β =b l
∂dl(p,ψ)
∂β al(p)e−jωkτl(p)˜sk,(58)
where
∂dl(p,ψ)
∂β = κl
∥p−u l∥
∂gl(p,ψ)
∂β ,(59)
∂gl(p,ψ)
∂β = ∂gl(p,ψ)
∂α
∂α
∂β.(60)
The component derivatives are
∂gl(p,ψ)
∂α =
h
cos

θ(t)
l (p)−ϕ

−1
i
gl(p,ψ)(61)
and
∂α
∂β =− log(2)
4
sin(β/2)
(cos(β/2)−1) 2.(62)
D. Channel Attenuation Derivatives
The partial derivative with respect to channel attenu-
ation vectorbis
∂µl,k
∂b

i
= ∂bl
∂bi
dl(p,ψ)al(p)e−jωkτl(p)˜sk,
for1≤i≤L(63)
=
(
dl(p,ψ)al(p)e−jωkτl(p)˜sk, l=i
0M, l̸=i ,(64)
where0 M is theM×1zero vector.
WILLIAMS ET AL.: EFFICIENT LOCALIZATION OF DIRECTIONAL EMITTERS 11
E. Signal Sample Derivatives
The partial derivative with respect to signal samples
˜sis ∂µl,k
∂˜s

i
(65)
=
(
bldl(p,ψ)al(p)e−jωkτl(p), i=k
0M, i̸=k ,
for1≤i≤N.(66)
These partial derivatives are combined according to (39)
and used to construct the Fisher Information Matrix
blocks as described in Section III.
REFERENCES
[1] K. Ho and Y . Chan
Solution and performance analysis of geolocation by TDOA
IEEE Transactions on Aerospace and Electronic Systems,
vol. 29, no. 4, pp. 1311–1322, Oct. 1993.
[2] H. Ketabalian, M. Biguesh, and A. Sheikhi
A Closed-Form Solution for Localization Based on RSS
IEEE Transactions on Aerospace and Electronic Systems,
vol. 56, no. 2, pp. 912–923, Apr. 2020.
[3] A. Weiss
Direct position determination of narrowband radio frequency
transmitters
IEEE Signal Processing Letters, vol. 11, no. 5, pp. 513–516,
May 2004.
[4] C. Liu, J. Yang, and F. Wang
Joint TDOA and AOA location algorithm
Journal of Systems Engineering and Electronics, vol. 24, no. 2,
pp. 183–188, Apr. 2013.
[5] D. Musicki and W. Koch
Geolocation using TDOA and FDOA measurements
In2008 11th International Conference on Information Fusion,
Jun. 2008, pp. 1–8.
[6] Y . Song, C. Hao, M. Li, X. Wang, J. Li, and Q. Wan
A Fast Algorithm of Direct Position Determination Using
TDOA and FDOA
Journal of Physics: Conference Series, vol. 1169, p. 012014,
Feb. 2019.
[7] M. Y . You, A. N. Lu, Y . X. Ye, and K. Huang
Direct Position Determination Using Compressive Sensing
Measurements without Reconstruction
IEEE Transactions on Aerospace and Electronic Systems, pp.
1–8, 2022.
[8] N. Salman, M. Ghogho, and A. H. Kemp
On the Joint Estimation of the RSS-Based Location and Path-
loss Exponent
IEEE Wireless Communications Letters, vol. 1, no. 1, pp. 34–
37, Feb. 2012.
[9] T. S. Rappaport
Wireless Communications: Principles and Practice. Cambridge
University Press, 2024.
[10] M.-Y . Youet al.
Joint Direct Estimation of Emitter Location and Antenna Beam
Direction Based on Baseband Reconstruction
IEEE Sensors Journal, vol. 23, no. 9, pp. 9607–9619, May
2023.
[11] M. I. Skolnik
Introduction to Radar Systems. McGraw-hill New York, 1980,
vol. 3.
[12] M. J. Sibley
Modern Telecommunications: Basic Principles and Practices.
CRC Press, 2018.
[13] F. Williams, D. Jayalath, A. J. Tom, T. Martin, and C. Fookes
Enhancing Emitter Localization Accuracy Through Integration
of Received Signal Strength in Direct Position Determination
In2023 IEEE Statistical Signal Processing Workshop (SSP),
Jul. 2023, pp. 458–462.
[14] S. M. Kay
Fundamentals of Statistical Signal Processing: Estimation The-
ory. USA: Prentice-Hall, Inc., Feb. 1993.
[15] L. Tzafri and A. J. Weiss
High-Resolution Direct Position Determination Using MVDR
IEEE Transactions on Wireless Communications, vol. 15, no. 9,
pp. 6449–6461, Sep. 2016.
[16] F. Chen, T. Zhou, B. Sun, L. Kong, and X. Xiao
Direct position determination and effective extraction of multi-
ple transmitters
The Journal of Engineering, vol. 2019, no. 21, pp. 7787–7791,
2019.
[17] X. Shi, X. Zhang, and H. Zeng
Direct Position Determination of Non-Circular Sources for Mul-
tiple Arrays via Weighted Euler ESPRIT Data Fusion Method
Applied Sciences, vol. 12, no. 5, p. 2503, Jan. 2022.
[18] G. Z. Wu, M. Zhang, and F. C. Guo
High-resolution direct position determination based on
eigenspace using a single moving ULA
Signal, Image and Video Processing, vol. 13, no. 5, pp. 887–
894, Jul. 2019.
[19] P. Tseng
Convergence of a Block Coordinate Descent Method for Non-
differentiable Minimization
Journal of Optimization Theory and Applications, vol. 109,
no. 3, pp. 475–494, Jun. 2001.
Fraser Williams(Student Member, IEEE)
received the B.Eng in electrical engineering and
B.Sc in physics from the Queensland Univer-
sity of Technology, Australia, in 2021, and is
pursuing the Ph.D. in electrical engineering at
the same university.
He is employed as a Research Engineer
at Revolution Aerospace Pty Ltd in Brisbane,
Queensland, Australia. His research interests
include statistical signal processing, array pro-
cessing, and radio frequency signal processing.
Akila Pemasirireceived her B.Sc. degree
in Computer Science and Engineering from
the University of Moratuwa, Sri Lanka, and
her Ph.D. from the Queensland University of
Technology (QUT), Australia, in 2021. She is
currently a Postdoctoral Research Fellow in
the Signal Processing, Artificial Intelligence,
and Vision Technologies group at QUT. Her
research interests include applying machine
learning principles to solve complex problems
across various domains, including communications, defense, medical
and healthcare, sports, and infrastructure.
12 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON AEROSPACE AND ELECTRONIC SYSTEMS VOL. XX, No. XX XXXXX YYYY
Dhammika Jayalath(Senior Member, IEEE)
received the B.Sc. degree in electronics and
telecommunications engineering from the Uni-
versity of Moratuwa, Sri Lanka, the M.Eng.
degree in telecommunications from the Asian
Institute of Technology, Thailand, and the
Ph.D. degree in wireless communications from
Monash University, Australia, in 2002. He was
a fellow with the Australian National Univer-
sity and a Senior Researcher with the National
ICT Australia. He has been an Academician with the Science and
Engineering Faculty, Queensland University of Technology, since 2007.
His research interests include the general areas of communications and
signal processing. He has published significantly in these areas. His
current research interests include applying machine learning principles
in communication systems, physical layer security, and signal design
for robust communications.
Terrence Martinis a co-founder of Revolu-
tion Aerospace Pty Ltd. He is a former RAAF
& Army military aerospace engineering officer
with a PhD in Applied Signal Processing &
Machine Learning. He has accumulated signif-
icant experience across a 35-year career-span,
with time on fast jets & rotary wing manned
platforms, alongside an extensive array of work
for RAAF, Navy & Army on a variety of UA V
platforms. Terry has a deep interest in UA V
related technologies, and in 2018 he was nominated by Engineers
Australia as one of Australia’s 30 most Innovative Engineers.
Clinton Fookes(Senior Member, IEEE) re-
ceived the B.Eng. in Aerospace and Avionics,
the MBA degree, and the Ph.D. degree in com-
puter vision. He is currently the Associate Dean
Research and a Professor of Vision and Signal
Processing with the Faculty of Engineering
at the Queensland University of Technology,
Brisbane, Australia. His research interests in-
clude computer vision, machine learning, sig-
nal processing, and artificial intelligence. He
serves on the editorial boards for IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON IMAGE
PROCESSING and Pattern Recognition. He has previously served on
the Editorial Board for IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION
FORENSICS AND SECURITY . He is a Fellow of the International
Association of Pattern Recognition and a Fellow of the Australian
Academy of Technological Sciences and Engineering. He is a Senior
Member of the IEEE and a multi-award winning researcher including
an Australian Institute of Policy and Science Young Tall Poppy, an
Australian Museum Eureka Prize winner, Engineers Australia Engineer-
ing Excellence Award, Australian Defence Scientist of the Year, and a
Senior Fulbright Scholar.
WILLIAMS ET AL.: EFFICIENT LOCALIZATION OF DIRECTIONAL EMITTERS 13