Contents lists available at ScienceDirect
Control Engineering Practice
journal homepage: www.elsevier.com/locate/conengprac
Multi-agent active multi-target search with intermittent measurements✩
Bilal Yousuf∗,1, Radu Herzal , Zsófia Lendek , Lucian Buşoniu∗,1
Technical University of Cluj-Napoca, Memorandumului 28, Cluj-Napoca, 400114, Cluj, Romania
A R T I C L E I N F O
Keywords:
Multi-target search
Active sensing
Multi-agent systems
Event-triggered measurements
Parrot Mambo minidrone
TurtleBotA B S T R A C T
Consider a multi-agent system that must find an unknown number of static targets at unknown locations
as quickly as possible. To estimate the number and positions of targets from noisy and sometimes missing
measurements, we use a customized particle-based probability hypothesis density filter. Novel methods are
introduced that select waypoints for the agents in a decoupled manner from taking measurements, which allows
optimizing over waypoints arbitrarily far in the environment while taking as many measurements as necessary
along the way. Optimization involves control cost, target refinement, and exploration of the environment.
Measurements are taken either periodically, or only when they are expected to improve target detection, in an
event-triggered manner. All this is done in 2D and 3D environments, for a single agent as well as for multiple
homogeneous or heterogeneous agents, leading to a comprehensive framework for (Multi-Agent) Active target
Search with Intermittent measurements – (MA)ASI. In simulations and real-life experiments involving a Parrot
Mambo drone and a TurtleBot3 ground robot, the novel framework works better than baselines including
lawnmowers, mutual-information-based methods, active search methods, and our earlier exploration-based
techniques.
1. Introduction
The search for multiple targets by mobile robots is essential in many
applications, such as victim search and rescue ( Berger & Lo , 2015 ;
Cooper , 2020 ; Pallin, Rashid, & Ögren , 2021 ), surveillance ( Papaioan-
nou, Kolios, Theocharides, Panayiotou, & Polycarpou , 2021 ), and ex-
ploration of unknown environments ( Aguilar, Bravo, Ruiz, Murrieta-
Cid, & Chavez , 2019 ; Olcay, Bodeit, & Lohmann , 2020 ; Xu, Yang,
Meng, Cai, & Fu , 2019 ). Here, we are motivated by the Horizon Europe
SeaClear2.0 project ( https://www.seaclear2.eu/ ), in which a team of
underwater, sea surface, and aerial robots must find targets consist-
ing of ocean litter items. We therefore consider a multi-agent system
(MAS) that explores a 3D or 2D environment to find an unknown
number of static targets at unknown locations as quickly as possible.
Each agent’s sensor probabilistically detects targets depending on their
position relative to the agent and only provides noisy measurements for
those targets that are detected. A particle-based Probability Hypothesis
Density (PHD) filter ( Liu, Ji, Zhang, & Liao , 2020 ; Vo, Singh, & Doucet ,
2005 ) maintains estimated target positions in the form of an intensity
✩This work was been financially supported by SeaClear2.0, a project co-funded by the European Climate, Infrastructure and Environment Executive Agency
(CINEA) under grant agreement no. 101093822; and by project DECIDE, no. 57/14.11.2022 funded under the PNRR I8 scheme by the Romanian Ministry of
Research, Innovation, and Digitisation.
∗Corresponding author.
E-mail addresses: bilal.yousuf@aut.utcluj.ro (B. Yousuf), radu@student.utcluj.ro (R. Herzal), zsofia.lendek@aut.utcluj.ro (Zs. Lendek),
lucian.busoniu@aut.utcluj.ro (L. Buşoniu).
1The first and last authors are joint main authors with equal contribution.function, a generalization of the probability density that integrates to
the expected number of targets ( Dames , 2020 ).
Many ways have been proposed to identify a known or unknown
number of dynamic or static targets from measurements taken by mo-
bile agents, in robotics ( Bircher, Kamel, Alexis, Oleynikova, & Siegwart ,
2018 ; Dang, Khattak, Mascarich, & Alexis , 2019 ; Ivić, 2022 ; Juliá,
Gil, & Reinoso , 2012 ; Murillo, Sánchez, Genzelis, & Giovanini , 2018 ;
Trenev, Tkachenko, & Kustov , 2021 ; Wang, Su, Zhu, & Shen , 2010 ;
Yan, Di, Jiang, Jiang, & Fan , 2019 ; Zhou, Chen, He, & Bian , 2021 ),
control ( Dames, Tokekar, & Kumar , 2017 ; Kim, 2021 ; Lin & Goodrich ,
2014 ; Tyagi, Kumar, & Sujit , 2021 ), reinforcement learning ( Kim, Jang,
& Kim , 2023 ; Li, Ren, & Li , 2024 ; Matzliach, Ben-Gal, & Kagan , 2022 ;
Shen, Lei, Zhang, Li, Cai, & Zhang , 2023 ; Wang & Fang , 2023 ; Wang,
Wei, Jiang, Zhao, Wang, & Qi , 2022 ; Xia, Luo, Liu, Zhang, Shi, &
Liu, 2023 ; Xiao, Tan, Zhou, & Feroskhan , 2023 ; Zhang, Wang, Ge, &
Huang , 2024 ; Zhou, Liu, Shi, Li, Ning, Liu, & Gao , 2023 ), multi-target
filtering ( Chen & Dames , 2020 , 2022 ; Dames , 2020 ; Dames & Kumar ,
2015 ; Kagan, Goren, & Ben-Gal , 2010 ), etc. MAS are often used ( Dames
& Kumar , 2015 ; Dames et al. , 2017 ; Leonard & Zoubir , 2019 ; Liu et al. ,
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.conengprac.2024.106094
Received 29 January 2024; Received in revised form 5 September 2024; Accepted 9 September 2024Control  Engineering  Practice  153 (2024)  106094  
Available  online  18 September  2024  
0967-0661/©  2024  The Authors.  Published  by Elsevier  Ltd. This is an open access  article  under  the CC BY license  ( http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/  ). 
B. Yousuf et al.
List of Notations
Subscripts are used to specify the time step 𝑘and decision index
𝑑, whereas superscript 𝑎indicates agent index and superscript 𝑤
is the candidate waypoint index. Symbol ‘‘*’’ indicates optimal
values. A tilde ‘‘ ̃’’ indicates a secondary/auxiliary notation. Left-
superscript ‘‘ 2D’’ indicates the 2D special case of the framework.
For sets, |⋅|denotes cardinality.
Distributions
𝛿𝜉 Dirac delta centered on 𝜉
 Normal distribution
 Bernoulli distribution
Agent dynamics, targets and sensing
𝑎,𝐴 Agent index, number of agents
𝑓 Agent nonlinear dynamics
𝑞,𝑛𝑞 Agent states, number of agent states
̃ 𝑞 Agent position in Cartesian coordinates
ℎ State feedback control law
𝑢,𝑛𝑢 Agent control input, number of inputs
𝑇𝑠 Control sampling period
𝑘 Discrete time step
𝐸 Environment
𝑋 Set of targets
𝑖,𝑁 Target index, total number of targets
𝑥= (𝚇,𝚈,𝚉) Position of target in 3𝐷
𝜋 Probability of detection
𝙵 Size of probabilistic field of view
𝑏 Binary target-detected event
𝑧,𝑍 Measurement, set of measurements
𝜚,𝑝 Gaussian measurement noise, Gaussian den-
sity function
𝑅,𝜎 Measurement covariance matrix, standard
deviation
𝛥 Measurement period
𝑚,𝑘𝑚 Measurement index, time step of 𝑚th mea-
surement
𝑟,𝜃,𝜂 Range, heading angle, elevation angle
Filtering
𝐼 Intensity function
𝛷,𝛹 Prediction mapping, update mapping
𝛶 Intensity function of new targets
𝑗 Particle index
𝑥𝑗,𝜛𝑗Location, weight of particle 𝑗
𝑟,𝑚,𝑧 Threshold value for cluster radius, cluster
mass, measurement distance
Planning
𝑑,𝑘𝑑 Decision index, time step of decision with
index𝑑
𝑜, Waypoint candidate, set of waypoint candi-
dates
𝑤,𝑊 Candidate waypoint index, total number of
candidate waypoints
𝐾 Length of trajectory to a waypoint
2020; Shirsat & Berman, 2021; Wang & Fang, 2023; Zheng, Galland,
Tu, Yang, Lombard, & Gaud, 2020; Zhou, Tzoumas, Pappas, & Tokekar,𝐪,𝐮 Predicted state trajectory to a waypoint and
corresponding input sequence
𝑀 Number of measurements along a predicted
trajectory
C,T,E Control, target refinement, and exploration
components of the objective function
𝑐,𝐶 Index of a cluster, total number of clusters
𝜈 Center of a cluster
𝑒,̂ 𝑒 Real exploration function, predicted explo-
ration function
𝑙, Grid point index, set of grid point indices to
represent𝑒
𝛿 Threshold for triggering a measurement
Multi-agent sensing and planning
𝑘 Set of indices of agents that measure at step
𝑘
𝑘 Set of indices of agents that plan at step 𝑘
𝐰 Joint waypoint candidate index for all
planning agents
𝐽 Objective function
2019). Among all these fields, we focus here on (single and multi-agent)
multi-target filtering, because it accommodates
all the sources of uncertainty in our setting. Approaches in other
fields use different models of uncertainty (e.g. joint uncertainty on the
robot pose and map, versus our case of an unknown number of targets
at unknown locations that are unreliably and noisily detected); and
different representations, like occupancy maps, which are less suited
to our setting than intensity functions. For instance, targets clustered
in a single cell of an occupancy map will not be identified properly,
and if the number of targets is not very large, an occupancy grid may
be inefficient.
In multi-target filtering, most methods use variants of mutual infor-
mation (MI) to evaluate potential waypoints of the agents, e.g. Dames
(2020), Dames and Kumar (2015), Dames et al. (2017). MI measures
the amount of information between agent trajectories and the event
of not seeing any targets, so maximizing MI increases the chances of
seeing previously observed targets. A key shortcoming of such meth-
ods is that exploration of the environment to find new targets is
– to our best knowledge – not explicitly considered. Instead, some
methods include a search component for an unknown-target intensity
function (Chen, Chai, & Yi, 2022; Rost, Axehill, & Hendeby, 2021;
Sung & Tokekar, 2022), which can be viewed as an indirect form of
exploration. While methods from other fields do explore or aim to map
the entire environment (Bircher et al., 2018; Dang et al., 2019; Juliá
et al., 2012; Murillo et al., 2018; Shan, Yang, Liu, & Liu, 2023; Tindall,
Mair, & Nguyen, 2023; Wang et al., 2010, 2022; Yan et al., 2019; Zhou
et al., 2023), they are unsuitable for our context as explained above.
In our previous works, we already showed that incorporating an
explicit exploration objective in the optimization problem solved by
the agents to choose waypoints works better than relying only on MI,
both for a single agent in 2D (Yousuf, Lendek, & Buşoniu, 2022) or
3D (Yousuf, Lendek, & Buşoniu, 2024), as well as for MAS (Yousuf,
Lendek, & Buşoniu, 2023). To our knowledge, these methods were the
first to combine multi-target filtering with exploration. However, they
all take one measurement per agent waypoint. Here, we propose a set
of methods with the key novelty that waypoint selection and control for
navigation are decoupled from taking measurements . Since measurements
are not taken at each control step (but several measurements are taken
along the trajectory to the next waypoint) we call this framework
intermittent-measurement . Its key advantage is that it allows compu-
tationally feasible optimization over waypoints arbitrarily far in theControl  Engineering  Practice  153 (2024)  106094  
2 
B. Yousuf et al.
environment,2while taking as many measurements as desired along
the way, and taking control costs into account. Measurements are
taken either periodically, or only when they are expected to improve
target detection, in an event-triggered version that aims to reduce the
computational cost of running posterior updates without losing search
performance. All this is done in both 2D and 3D environments, for
a single agent as well as for multiple homogeneous or heterogeneous
agents, leading to a comprehensive framework for (Multi-Agent) Active
target Search with Intermittent measurements – (MA)ASI. In the multi-
agent case, agents can choose waypoints and take measurements fully
asynchronously.
To better explain, consider first a single agent, i.e. ASI. The agent’s
path is chosen by repeatedly picking future waypoints from a set of
candidates placed anywhere in the environment. For each candidate,
a trajectory is generated by a low-level controller, with a length that
depends on the candidate, and the best candidate is picked by solving
an optimization problem with three components: control cost, target
refinement, and exploration. The control component reduces the con-
trol effort required to reach the waypoint. Target refinement focuses on
better pinpointing the locations of targets about which measurements
were previously received, and is computed by summing up probabilities
of detection at estimated target locations. The exploration component
encourages moving towards new, unseen regions and is computed via
an exploration function that is initially large across the whole environ-
ment, and then decreases in observed regions. The planner considers
that measurements are taken at a constant multiple of the control
sampling period, but during execution, the method allows skipping
measurements when they are not expected to refine old targets nor
discover new ones, leading to an event-triggered version of ASI.
In the multi-agent case, MAASI repeatedly solves a joint problem
in which several agents optimize their waypoints at once, using a
multi-agent extension of the three-component objective above. In this
extension, agents coordinate in two ways. First, a common intensity
function is maintained using iterative-corrector PHD filtering (Liu et al.,
2020). Secondly, during optimization, the agents’ exploration objec-
tives are coupled, so each agent understands the regions that other
agents will explore, and the team does not needlessly cluster in one
region. A nontrivial extra challenge in MAASI is that agent trajectories
are varying in length and sensor frequencies are different, so arbitrary
subsets of agents may plan or measure at any given time step. Mecha-
nisms are designed to cope with this, and an event-triggered version of
MAASI is also provided.
We evaluate the new methods ASI and MAASI in extensive sim-
ulations as well as in real-life single- and multi-robot experiments.
First, we pitch ASI against four single-agent baselines: a predefined
lawnmower pattern (Otte, Kuhlman, & Sofge, 2018), and three active-
search methods representative of the multi-target filtering field: an
MI-only method without any exploration, adapted from Dames and
Kumar (2015), a method with an unknown-target search component,
adapted from Sung and Tokekar (2022), and our earlier exploration-
based techniques (Yousuf et al., 2023), which take measurements only
at waypoints, and which we therefore call AS. In simulations, ASI
finds the targets faster (after fewer measurements) than the baselines,
and since MI-only techniques do not explore, they miss some targets.
Similarly, in the multiagent case, MAASI is better than multiagent
versions of the lawnmower and of the method adapted from Sung
and Tokekar (2022), as well as MAAS. Event-triggered measurements
perform similarly in terms of target detections, while the number of
measurements is reduced, for both single and multiple agents.
The real-life single-agent experiment involves a Parrot Mambo
minidrone exploring at a constant altitude to find targets on the
2The method of Dames and Kumar (2015) is closest to this idea, but there
the distance between measurements ‘‘dilates’’ with the length of the planned
trajectory, so measurements are not really decoupled from control. In addition,
that method is MI-only.floor using the camera. The results confirm that ASI improves over
AS and lawnmower search. The multi-agent experiment additionally
involves a TurtleBot3 ground robot, which is slower than the drone
and has a narrower field of view, but a lower-variance sensor. This
setup is notable for two reasons: it illustrates how the framework
handles heterogeneous agents, and it approximates the field scenario of
SeaClear2.0, where a fast drone with a wide field of view senses poorly
underwater using the camera, whereas a slower underwater robot sees
targets more accurately with a sonar that has a relatively narrow field
of view. As in the single-agent case, MAASI is better than MAAS and a
multi-agent lawnmower.
Summarizing, the key contributions of our paper are:
•A set of active target search methods in which the timescales of se-
lecting waypoints, performing control for navigation, and taking
measurements are decoupled, allowing for efficient optimiza-
tion over waypoints placed anywhere in the environment. Mea-
surements are taken either periodically or in an event-triggered
manner, only when they are expected to improve target detection.
•The methods are developed for both single agents and multi-
ple homogeneous or heterogeneous agents, leading overall to a
comprehensive framework for multi-agent active target search.
•Different from existing multi-target filtering works of other au-
thors, and similar to our earlier work, the methods include an
explicit exploration objective.
•In detailed simulation results, we demonstrate improvements
compared to four baselines including a lawnmower, two active
search methods from the literature, and our earlier exploration-
based methods.
•In real indoor experiments, a Parrot Mambo drone and (for the
multi-agent case) a TurtleBot3 ground robot search for targets
located on the floor. Real-life improvements are shown compared
to lawnmowers and our earlier exploration-based method.
Next, Section 2 formulates the problem directly in the 3D multi-
agent case, pointing out how it specializes to 2D and one agent.
Background on PHD filtering is provided in Section 3, separately for
one agent (Vo et al., 2005) and several (Liu et al., 2020). The filtering
framework is heavily customized for our purposes. Next, to make things
easier to follow, we fully present the single-agent case, starting with the
methods in Section 4, and followed by simulations and real-experiment
results in separate subsections of Section 5. Mirroring this structure, we
move to the multi-agent case, with the method in Section 6 and results
in Section 7. Section 8 concludes the paper.
2. Problem formulation
Consider a number 𝐴of agents that explore a compact 2D or 3𝐷
space (environment) 𝐸in search of an unknown number of static tar-
gets, as illustrated in Fig. 1. The main objective is to find the positions
of all the targets in as few steps as possible. We will mathematically
formulate an optimization problem in Section 4, see (17) there. The
dynamics of each agent are:
𝑞𝑎
𝑘+1=𝑓𝑎(𝑞𝑎
𝑘,𝑢𝑎
𝑘) (1)
with𝑘being the discrete time step and 𝑎= 1,2,…,𝐴the index of the
agent. The agent index will be dropped later on for the single-agent
case. The state 𝑞𝑎
𝑘∈ℜ𝑛𝑎
𝑞, where𝑛𝑎
𝑞is the dimension of the state of agent
𝑎, contains the position – denoted by ̃ 𝑞𝑎
𝑘– and will typically also include
orientation, linear, and angular velocities. The input is 𝑢𝑎
𝑘∈ℜ𝑛𝑎
𝑢, and
is applied with sampling period 𝑇𝑠. The control law can be, e.g., a state
feedback:
𝑢𝑎
𝑘=ℎ𝑎(𝑞𝑎
𝑘) (2)
but this is just an example, and in general other controllers may be
used. It is assumed that the agents’ state is known accurately enoughControl  Engineering  Practice  153 (2024)  106094  
3 
B. Yousuf et al.
Fig. 1. Environments with 12 targets and 2 agents. Top: 3D. Bottom: 2D, where the
color shows the probability of detection of each agent at their current position, orange
to blue meaning higher to lower probability. (For interpretation of the usage of color
in this and subsequent figures, the reader is referred to the web version of this article.).
not to require an explicit treatment of state uncertainty, and that for
any𝜖 > 0the controller is able to take the agent 𝜖-close to any
position in 𝐸in a finite number of steps. The accurate-state assumption
is justified by the fact that robot pose sensors (e.g. differential GPS,
inertial measurement units) are generally significantly more accurate
than sensors for target detection (e.g. 2D or 3D cameras). This as-
sumption is generally made – although not always explicitly stated –
in target search and tracking applications, see e.g. Dames (2020 ), Kim
(2021 ), Kim et al. (2023 ), Papaioannou et al. (2021 ), Zhou et al. (2019 ).
The controllability assumption is mild: since classic state-feedback con-
trollers usually ensure exponential (not just asymptotic) convergence,
it is easily satisfied. Furthermore, recent finite-time, fixed-time, and
prescribed-performance control methods provide even stronger conver-
gence guarantees, see e.g. Chung, Giri, and Son (2019 ), Gu, Sun, and
Chen (2021 ), Pandey, Kamal, and Ghosh (2024 ), Shoufeng, Yingnan,
Liang, and Lei (2024 ), Sun, Zhu, and Li (2024 ).
In the environment 𝐸there are𝑁stationary targets, and each target
𝑖is located at coordinates 𝑥𝑖= (𝚇𝑖,𝚈𝑖,𝚉𝑖) ∈𝐸,𝑖= 1,2,…,𝑁. The set
of targets is denoted by 𝑋. Both the cardinality 𝑁and the locations of
the targets are initially unknown.
We use a Random Finite Set (RFS) framework ( Chen & Dames ,
2022 ; Dames , 2020 ; Dames & Kumar , 2015 ; Dames et al. , 2017 ; Lin
& Goodrich , 2014 ; Shirsat & Berman , 2021 ; Vo et al. , 2005 ) to esti-
mate target locations, as detailed in Yousuf et al. (2024 ). Agents are
equipped with different sensors in general. At each step, agents receive
noisy measurements about a subset of targets that are detected. The
probability with which agent 𝑎at Cartesian coordinates ̃ 𝑞𝑎= [𝚇𝑎,𝚈𝑎,𝚉𝑎]
detects a target at position 𝑥= [𝚇,𝚈,𝚉]is denoted by 𝜋𝑎(𝑥,𝑞𝑎). For
instance, in most of our simulations, we consider an omnidirectionalranging sensor for which the probability of detection is defined as:
𝜋𝑎(𝑥,𝑞𝑎) =𝐺𝑎𝑒−‖𝜁𝑎‖∕2(3)
where scalar 𝐺𝑎≤1, and:
𝜁𝑎=(
𝚇−𝚇𝑎
𝙵𝑎
𝚇,𝚈−𝚈𝑎
𝙵𝑎
𝚈,𝚉−𝚉𝑎
𝙵𝑎
𝚉)
(4)
is the normalized distance between target 𝑥and agent 𝑎. In (4),
(𝙵𝑎
𝚇,𝙵𝑎
𝚈,𝙵𝑎
𝚉)are normalization constants that may be interpreted as the
size of the (probabilistic) field of view (FOV) of agent 𝑎. This detection
probability is used often in the field of target search, see e.g. Dames
et al. (2017 ), Vo et al. (2005 ). If𝙵𝑎
𝚇=𝙵𝑎
𝚈=𝙵𝑎
𝚉,𝜋𝑎is radially symmetric
around the position of the agent 𝑎, as illustrated in Fig. 1 (bottom), for
the2𝐷case. Our method works for a general form of 𝜋𝑎; for instance,
in the experiments, a form of 𝜋𝑎different from (3) will be used.
Define𝑘𝑎
𝑚as the time step at which agent 𝑎takes the𝑚th mea-
surement, where 𝑚≥0denotes the index of the measurement. We
consider two settings. In the periodic setting, measurements are taken
with a multiple 𝛥𝑎of the control sampling period 𝑇𝑠. For example,
𝛥𝑎= 2 corresponds to 𝑘𝑎
𝑚= 0,2,4,6 …. Measurement instants are
illustrated in the graphical representation of our framework for Active
target Search with Intermittent measurements (ASI) in Fig. 3, with
red lines along the black and green trajectories. In the event-triggered
setting, measurements are taken aperiodically, in a manner that will be
explained in Section 4.
Remark 1. Much of the framework presented in this section is stan-
dard, except for the mechanism for taking intermittent measurements
(only at steps 𝑘𝑎
𝑚), which is needed for the planners later.
The binary event 𝑏𝑎
𝑖𝑘𝑎𝑚of agent𝑎with position ̃ 𝑞𝑎
𝑘𝑎𝑚= (𝚇𝑎
𝑘𝑎𝑚,𝚈𝑎
𝑘𝑎𝑚,𝚉𝑎
𝑘𝑎𝑚)
at step𝑘𝑎
𝑚(i.e. when taking the 𝑚th measurement) detecting a target at
position𝑥𝑖follows a Bernoulli distribution given by the probability of
detection,𝑏𝑎
𝑖𝑘𝑎𝑚∼(𝜋𝑎(𝑥𝑖,𝑞𝑎
𝑘𝑎𝑚)). Given Bernoulli variables 𝑏𝑎
𝑖𝑘𝑎𝑚, together
with the actual target positions 𝑥𝑖= (𝚇𝑖,𝚈𝑖,𝚉𝑖), the set of measurements
𝑍𝑎
𝑘𝑎𝑚is:
𝑍𝑎
𝑘𝑎𝑚=⋃
𝑖∈{1,…,𝑁}s.t.𝑏𝑎
𝑖𝑘𝑎𝑚=1𝑧𝑎
𝑘𝑎𝑚(5)
where𝑧𝑎
𝑘𝑎𝑚=𝑔𝑎
𝑘𝑎𝑚(𝑥𝑖) +𝜚𝑎
𝑘𝑎𝑚, and𝑔𝑎
𝑘𝑎𝑚(𝑥𝑖)is defined as:
𝑔𝑎
𝑘𝑎𝑚(𝑥𝑖) =[
𝑟𝑎
𝑖𝑘𝑎𝑚,𝜃𝑎
𝑖𝑘𝑎𝑚,𝜂𝑎
𝑖𝑘𝑎𝑚]𝑇
(6)
with
𝑟𝑎
𝑖𝑘𝑎𝑚=√
(𝚇𝑖−𝚇𝑎
𝑘𝑎𝑚)2+ (𝚈𝑖−𝚈𝑎
𝑘𝑎𝑚)2+ (𝚉𝑖−𝚉𝑎
𝑘𝑎𝑚)2 (7)
𝜃𝑎
𝑖𝑘𝑎𝑚= arctan𝚈𝑖−𝚈𝑎
𝑘𝑎𝑚
𝚇𝑖−𝚇𝑎
𝑘𝑎𝑚(8)
𝜂𝑎
𝑖𝑘𝑎𝑚= arcsin𝚉𝑖−𝚉𝑎
𝑘𝑎𝑚
𝑟𝑎
𝑖𝑘𝑎𝑚(9)
Thus, for each target 𝑖detected, the measurement consists of the range
𝑟𝑎
𝑖𝑘𝑎𝑚, bearing angle 𝜃𝑎
𝑖𝑘𝑎𝑚, and elevation angle 𝜂𝑎
𝑖𝑘𝑎𝑚relative to the agent.
This measurement is affected by Gaussian noise 𝜚𝑎
𝑘𝑎𝑚∼(,𝟎,𝑅𝑎), with
mean 𝟎= [0,0,0]⊤and diagonal covariance 𝑅𝑎= diag[(𝜎𝑎)2,(𝜎𝑎)2,(𝜎𝑎)2].
Based on the measurement model, the target measurement density
𝑝𝑎(𝑧𝑎|𝑥)is:
𝑝𝑎(𝑧𝑎|𝑥) =(𝑧𝑎,𝑔𝑎
𝑘𝑎𝑚(𝑥),𝑅𝑎) (10)
i.e. a Gaussian density centered on 𝑔𝑎
𝑘𝑎𝑚(𝑥)with covariance matrix 𝑅𝑎.
This density will be used to estimate the target locations.
For the special case of 2D space, the measurements in (5) become
𝑧𝑎
𝑘𝑎𝑚=2D𝑔𝑎
𝑘𝑎𝑚(𝑥𝑖) +2D𝜚𝑎
𝑘𝑎𝑚. Here2D𝑔𝑎
𝑘𝑎𝑚(𝑥𝑖) =[
𝑟𝑎
𝑖𝑘𝑎𝑚,𝜃𝑎
𝑖𝑘𝑎𝑚]𝑇
contains only
the Euclidean distance 𝑟𝑎
𝑖𝑘𝑎𝑚and the bearing angle 𝜃𝑎
𝑖𝑘𝑎𝑚, computed re-
spectively as in (7) and (8) while imposing 𝚉𝑎=𝚉𝑖= 0. Moreover,
2𝐷𝜚𝑎
𝑘𝑎𝑚is a 2D Gaussian noise with mean [0,0]𝑇and covariance 𝑅𝑎=
diag[(𝜎𝑎)2,(𝜎𝑎)2].Control  Engineering  Practice  153 (2024)  106094  
4 
B. Yousuf et al.
Fig. 2. Illustration of an intensity function defined over 2D space.
3. Background on the estimation framework
This section summarizes the background on Probability Hypothesis
Density (PHD) and Iterated-Corrector PHD (IC-PHD) filtering, adapted
from Vo et al. (2005 ) and Liu et al. (2020 ). We start with the single-
agent PHD filter in Section 3.1, followed by the multi-agent IC-PHD fil-
ter in Section 3.2. Finally, in Section 3.3 we present methods for mark-
ing well-defined targets as found and ignoring future measurements
that may come from these targets.
Remark 2. Compared to standard PHD and IC-PHD filtering, the
framework is modified here to accommodate the intermittent mea-
surements of Section 2, by running posterior updates only when mea-
surements are taken. These modifications become nontrivial in the
multiagent case, where an arbitrary (possibly empty) subset of agents
may measure at each step.
3.1. Single-agent PHD filter
Since in this section we consider a single agent, we drop the agent
index (superscript) 𝑎. Define first the intensity function 𝐼∶𝐸→
[0,∞), which is similar to a probability density function, with the key
difference that its integral ∫𝑆𝐼(𝑥)𝑑𝑥over some subset 𝑆 ⊆ 𝐸 is not
the probability mass of 𝑆, but the expected number of targets in 𝑆.
An example of an intensity function in 2D is given in Fig. 2, where
the three peaks correspond to possible target locations, and the circles
illustrate the weighted particles.3For example, the red patch in Fig. 2
is the intensity function 𝐼defined over the corresponding rectangle 𝑆
lying in the (𝑋,𝑌)plane. The integral of 𝐼over this red region gives
the expected number of targets in 𝑆.
The PHD filter performs Bayesian updates of an intensity function
based on the measurements 𝑍𝑘𝑚, and is summarized as:
𝐼𝑘|𝑘−1=𝛷(𝐼𝑘−1|𝑘−1)
𝐼𝑘|𝑘={
𝐼𝑘𝑚|𝑘𝑚=𝛹𝑘𝑚(𝐼𝑘𝑚|𝑘𝑚−1,𝑍𝑘𝑚),if𝑘=𝑘𝑚for𝑚≥0
𝐼𝑘|𝑘−1, otherwise(11)
Here,𝐼𝑘|𝑘−1is the prior intensity function, predicted based on 𝐼𝑘−1|𝑘−1
at the previous step 𝑘− 1, and𝐼𝑘𝑚|𝑘𝑚denotes the posterior generated
after processing the new measurements at 𝑘𝑚. Note that prediction is
performed at every step, while updates using 𝛹𝑘𝑚are performed only
at𝑘=𝑘𝑚, when a new measurement becomes available. At any 𝑘≠𝑘𝑚,
𝐼𝑘|𝑘remains equal to the prior, so it is not a true posterior, but we
accept this abuse of notation to keep the updates coherent.
3In reality, there is no constraint that particle weights are on the PHD
surface, this situation is shown here to give a more intuitive representation.The prior𝐼𝑘|𝑘−1is defined as:
𝐼𝑘|𝑘−1(𝑥) =𝛷(𝐼𝑘−1|𝑘−1)(𝑥) =𝛶+∫𝐸𝑝𝑠(𝜉)𝛿𝜉(𝑥)𝐼𝑘−1|𝑘−1(𝜉)𝑑𝜉 (12)
where𝑝𝑠(𝜉)is the probability that a target previously located at position
𝜉still exists. In our specific problem, targets are stationary, so the
transition density of a target 𝑥at𝜉is defined as the Dirac delta 𝛿𝜉(𝑥)
centered on 𝜉. Moreover, 𝛶, chosen here to be a constant, denotes the
intensity function of a new target appearing anywhere.
Now, to compute the posterior intensity function 𝐼𝑘𝑚|𝑘𝑚at step
𝑘𝑚using the measurements 𝑍𝑘𝑚, we apply the multi-target posterior
operator𝛹𝑘𝑚(𝐼𝑘𝑚|𝑘𝑚−1,𝑍𝑘𝑚)(𝑥)to the prior intensity function 𝐼𝑘𝑚|𝑘𝑚−1:
𝐼𝑘𝑚|𝑘𝑚(𝑥) =𝛹𝑘𝑚(𝐼𝑘𝑚|𝑘𝑚−1,𝑍𝑘𝑚)(𝑥) =
=⎡
⎢
⎢
⎢⎣1 −𝜋(𝑥,𝑞𝑘𝑚) +∑
𝑧∈𝑍𝑘𝑚𝜓𝑘𝑚𝑧(𝑥)
⟨
𝜓𝑘𝑚𝑧,𝐼𝑘𝑚|𝑘𝑚−1⟩⎤
⎥
⎥
⎥⎦⋅𝐼𝑘𝑚|𝑘𝑚−1(𝑥)(13)
where𝜓𝑘𝑚𝑧(𝑥) =𝜋(𝑥,𝑞𝑘𝑚)𝑝(𝑧|𝑥)denotes the overall probability density
of detecting a target at 𝑥, via a measurement 𝑧with𝑝defined in (10),
and
⟨
𝜓𝑘𝑚𝑧,𝐼𝑘𝑚|𝑘𝑚−1⟩
=∫𝐸𝜓𝑘𝑚𝑧(𝑥)𝐼𝑘𝑚|𝑘𝑚−1(𝑥)𝑑𝑥
In practice, we apply the Sequential Monte-Carlo Probability Hypothe-
sis Density (SMC-PHD) filter ( Vo et al. , 2005 ), which uses at each 𝑘a
set of weighted particles (𝑥𝑗,𝜛𝑗
𝑘|𝑘)to represent 𝐼𝑘|𝑘, with the property
that∫𝑆𝐼𝑘|𝑘(𝑥)𝑑𝑥≈∑
𝑥𝑗∈𝑆𝜛𝑗
𝑘|𝑘for any𝑆 ⊆ 𝐸 . For more details, refer
to Yousuf et al. (2024 ).
3.2. Multi-agent IC-PHD filter
Let us next consider the full set of 𝐴agents, some of which receive
noisy multi-target measurements at step 𝑘. Define 𝑘to be the set of
indices of the agents that receive measurements at 𝑘. Thus, an agent
𝑎∈𝑘has𝑘=𝑘𝑎
𝑚for some𝑚. Multi-agent measurements are
illustrated in Fig. 10 of Section 6, with red lines along the green and
purple trajectories. In the example of that figure, there are two agents;
if both agents happen to measure at 𝑘, then 𝑘= {1,2}, whereas if
just one agent measures at 𝑘, then 𝑘= {1} or𝑘= {2} , respectively,
depending on which agent measures. It is also possible that no agent
measures at 𝑘, i.e.𝑘= ∅.
In general, each agent 𝑎∈𝑘receives a measurement set 𝑍𝑎
𝑘–
that concerns targets at coordinates 𝑥– depending on the probability of
detection𝜋𝑎(𝑥,𝑞𝑎
𝑘)and on the measurement density 𝑝𝑎(𝑧𝑎|𝑥), see again
Section 2. The prediction step is the same as in (11) and (12), as it does
not depend on the measurements. The resulting prior 𝐼𝑘|𝑘−1is used to
initialize the multi-agent posterior 𝐼0
𝑘|𝑘, with agent index 0, meaning
‘‘before processing measurements of any agent’’:
𝐼𝑘|𝑘−1=𝛷(𝐼𝑘−1|𝑘−1)(𝑥) =∶𝐼0
𝑘|𝑘(14)
The IC-PHD filter ( Liu et al. , 2020 ) then generates a posterior intensity
function𝐼𝑘|𝑘by processing sequentially the measurements of each
agent𝑎∈𝑘:
𝐼𝑎
𝑘|𝑘(𝑥) =𝛹𝑎
𝑘(𝐼𝑎−
𝑘|𝑘,𝑍𝑎
𝑘)(𝑥),for𝑎∈𝑘in increasing order
𝐼𝑘|𝑘(𝑥) ∶=𝐼|𝑘|
𝑘|𝑘(𝑥)(15)
where𝑎−is the previous agent index in 𝑘, and𝑎− = 0 if𝑎is the first
index in 𝑘. Each IC-PHD posterior update is defined as:
𝐼𝑎
𝑘|𝑘=⎡
⎢
⎢
⎢⎣1 −𝜋𝑎(𝑥,𝑞𝑎
𝑘) +∑
𝑧𝑎∈𝑍𝑎
𝑘𝜓𝑎
𝑘,𝑧𝑎(𝑥)
⟨
𝜓𝑎
𝑘,𝑧𝑎,𝐼𝑎−
𝑘|𝑘⟩⎤
⎥
⎥
⎥⎦⋅𝐼𝑎−
𝑘|𝑘(𝑥) (16)
with𝜓𝑎
𝑘,𝑧𝑎(𝑥) =𝜋𝑎(𝑥,𝑞𝑎
𝑘𝑎𝑚)𝑝𝑎(𝑧𝑎|𝑥), similarly to the single-agent case. As
in Section 3.1, a particle-based approximation is used in practice. Note
that for the single-agent case, the IC-PHD reduces to the original PHD
filter where 𝑘= {1} at𝑘=𝑘𝑚and𝑘= ∅at other steps.Control  Engineering  Practice  153 (2024)  106094  
5 
B. Yousuf et al.
Fig. 3. Illustration of active target search with intermittent measurements.
3.3. Marking and removal of found targets
In a naive implementation, a target search algorithm will con-
tinue to concentrate on targets even when they are well-determined
(i.e. when they have clear peaks in the intensity function), which is
not beneficial since the time would be better spent refining poorly
seen targets or looking for new ones. To achieve this, we remove well-
determined targets. After the measurements of all agents in 𝑘are
processed, we extract the potential targets as clusters of particles using
K-means ( Gu, Zhou, & Chen , 2009 ). Two conditions are checked for
each cluster 𝑐: the cluster radius must be below a threshold 𝑟, and the
sum of the weights 𝜛𝑗of the particles in the cluster must be above
a mass threshold 𝑚. Then, each cluster that is narrow enough, and
associated with a large enough concentration of mass in the intensity
function, is taken to correspond to a well-determined ( found ) target at
position𝜈𝑐, equal to the center of the cluster. We remove the particles
belonging to such clusters.
To prevent the formation of another intensity peak at the locations
of old, already found targets, measurements that are likely to be asso-
ciated with these targets are also removed from future measurement
sets𝑍𝑎
𝑘𝑎𝑚. Naturally, the algorithm has no means of knowing which
target led to a particular measurement, so for each agent, among all
measurements that are below a threshold 𝑧(if any) to a found target,
it removes the closest measurement 𝑧𝑎
𝑘𝑎𝑚to it.
4. Single-agent planner
Consider now the problem of designing a path for oneagent to
explore the environment to quickly find targets. A classical solution
to this problem would be a lawnmower trajectory, which fills the
space uniformly. We evaluate the lawnmower as a baseline in our
experiments, but a quicker solution is desired. A framework similar
to model predictive control (MPC) is used to find this solution. The
planner ‘‘stitches together’’ a sequence of trajectories, each leading to
a waypoint. The waypoints are generated by solving an optimization
problem with an objective that combines control costs, refining poten-
tial targets, and exploration of the space. All this is formalized and
exemplified next. Since the single-agent case is considered in Sections 4
and 5, we drop the superscript 𝑎for the duration of these sections.
Consider the agent at decision index 𝑑that occurs at the discrete
time step𝑘𝑑, where the next waypoint must be selected; the agent
has state𝑞𝑘𝑑at this time step. Define a set of candidate waypoints
𝑑={𝑜𝑤
𝑑,𝑤= 1,…,𝑊}of the agent, where 𝑜𝑤
𝑑is the𝑤th candidate
waypoint at decision index 𝑑, and𝑊is the total number of candidate
waypoints. Set 𝑑should be sufficiently rich for the agent to searchfor the targets and, in general, it may be defined differently at each 𝑑,
e.g. relative to the agent’s state.
Fig. 3 illustrates and exemplifies the framework. This figure shows
the candidate waypoints from decision indices 𝑑and𝑑+ 1with dark
red×-shaped outlines. The trajectories from the current state 𝑞𝑘𝑑to
each candidate waypoint 𝑜𝑤
𝑑,𝑤= 1,…,𝑊, are shown as lines, black for
the candidates that were not chosen, and green for the optimal, chosen
candidate𝑜∗
𝑑and its corresponding trajectory. One candidate trajectory,
to a generic waypoint 𝑜𝑤
𝑑, is split into individual predicted steps and
also points out with blue arrows the predicted inputs and with red
vertical lines the measurement steps; see below for the mathematical
formulation. The optimal trajectory 𝑜∗
𝑑is also split into steps and
highlights measurement instants as red lines. The past trajectory to the
current decision index 𝑑is shown in a dashed green line. In general,
green means optimal, actually executed trajectories, black is related to
generic states, blue to inputs, and red to measurements.
Each candidate waypoint 𝑜𝑤
𝑑of the agent is fed as a reference point
to the low-level controller, which generates the predicted trajectory
𝐪𝑤
𝑑=[
𝑞𝑤
𝑘𝑑+1,…,𝑞𝑤
𝑘𝑑+𝐾𝑤
𝑑]
and corresponding control input sequence
𝐮𝑤
𝑑=[
𝑢𝑤
𝑘𝑑,…,𝑢𝑤
𝑘𝑑+𝐾𝑤
𝑑−1]
, illustrated in Fig. 3 by the black lines and blue
arrows, respectively. Here, 𝑞𝑤
𝑘𝑑+𝑗+1=𝑓(𝑞𝑤
𝑘𝑑+𝑗,𝑢𝑤
𝑘𝑑+𝑗), for𝑗= 0,…,𝐾𝑤
𝑑−
1, and𝐾𝑤
𝑑is the length of the trajectory to reach waypoint 𝑜𝑤
𝑑from the
current state 𝑞𝑘𝑑of the agent. We say the agent reached position 𝑜𝑤
𝑑
when the condition‖‖‖‖̃ 𝑞𝑤
𝑘𝑑+𝐾𝑤
𝑑−𝑜𝑤
𝑑‖‖‖‖≤𝜀is satisfied, where 𝜀is a tunable
threshold.
Along each such predicted trajectory 𝐪𝑤
𝑑, measurements are planned
to be taken periodically at instants 𝑘𝑑,̃ 𝑚=𝑘𝑑+̃ 𝑚𝛥, ̃ 𝑚 = 0,…,𝑀𝑤
𝑑− 1.
Here,𝑀𝑤
𝑑=⌈𝐾𝑤
𝑑
𝛥⌉
is the measurement horizon, defined as the total
number of measurements (including an imposed one at the decision
step) along a candidate trajectory 𝐪𝑤
𝑑. In Fig. 3, these instants are the
red lines along agent trajectories.
The optimal waypoint, 𝑜∗
𝑑, reached by the green trajectory in Fig. 3,
is selected by solving (by enumeration) the optimization problem:
𝑤∗∈ argmax𝑤=1,…,𝑊−C(𝑤) +𝛼⋅T(𝑤) +𝛽⋅E(𝑤)
𝐾𝑤
𝑑(17)
The objective function in (17) involves the control cost component
C(𝑤), the target refinement component T(𝑤)aiming to better find the
locations of the targets that were already seen, and the exploration
component E(𝑤), which drives the agent to explore unseen regions.
Tunable parameters 𝛼and𝛽control the tradeoff between these three
components. We normalize the objective function by the length of the
trajectory to avoid an incorrect preference for long trajectories.Control  Engineering  Practice  153 (2024)  106094  
6 
B. Yousuf et al.
The control cost (effort) to reach the 𝑤th candidate waypoint is:
C(𝑤) =𝐾𝑤
𝑑−1∑
𝑗=0(𝑢𝑤
𝑘𝑑+𝑗)𝑇⋅𝑢𝑤
𝑘𝑑+𝑗(18)
i.e. the sum of squared predicted inputs.
Target refinement is computed as the sum of the observation prob-
abilities of particle cluster centers (recall that particles are clustered
using K-means) across all predicted measurement steps:
T(𝑤) =𝑀𝑤
𝑑−1∑
̃ 𝑚=0𝐶𝑘𝑑∑
𝑐=1𝜋(𝜈𝑐
𝑘𝑑,𝑞𝑤
𝑘𝑑,̃ 𝑚) (19)
where𝐶𝑘𝑑denotes the number of clusters at 𝑘𝑑, and the center 𝜈𝑐
𝑘𝑑of
the𝑐th cluster has the meaning of an estimated target position. Note
that since we are actually not taking measurements while computing
(19), the clusters remain ‘‘frozen’’ to their values at 𝑘𝑑. The intuition be-
hind (19) is that the probability of detecting estimated target positions
should be maximized.
The exploration component E(𝑤)drives the agent to look at unseen
regions of the environment. Define first an exploration function 𝑒,
which is initialized to 1for the entire environment. We represent 𝑒on a
grid of points with indices in a set , which may be 3D or 2D depending
on the problem, initialized with:
𝑒0(𝑥𝑙) = 1,∀𝑙∈
At each real measurement step 𝑘𝑚,𝑒should decrease for each location
𝑥with an amount related to the probability of detection 𝜋(𝑥,𝑞𝑘𝑚).
Specifically, updates are performed on the grid:
𝑒𝑘𝑚(𝑥𝑙) =𝑒𝑘𝑚−1(𝑥𝑙)⋅(
1 −𝜋(𝑥𝑙,𝑞𝑘𝑚))
∀𝑙∈ (20)
The meaning of (20) is that position 𝑥𝑙has been explored to an amount
equal to the probability of detection. We emphasize that predicted
states are denoted with superscript 𝑤(e.g.,𝑞𝑤
𝑘𝑑+𝑗), while real states
are defined without such an index. Along each predicted trajectory 𝐪𝑤
𝑑,
we evaluate a predicted exploration function ̂ 𝑒𝑤
𝑘𝑑,̃ 𝑚(̃ 𝑞𝑤
𝑘𝑑,̃ 𝑚), computed at
predicted position ̃ 𝑞𝑤
𝑘𝑑,̃ 𝑚using multi-linear interpolation on the grid .
At the current decision index, ̂ 𝑒is equal to the last real exploration
function̂ 𝑒𝑤
𝑘𝑑,−1∶=𝑒𝑘𝑚, and afterward it decreases with each predicted
measurement along trajectory 𝐪𝑤
𝑑as follows:
̂ 𝑒𝑤
𝑘𝑑,̃ 𝑚(𝑥𝑙) =̂ 𝑒𝑤
𝑘𝑑,̃ 𝑚−1(𝑥𝑙)⋅(
1 −𝜋(𝑥𝑙,𝑞𝑤
𝑘𝑑,̃ 𝑚))
(21)
Finally, the exploration component along the 𝑤th trajectory is:
E(𝑤) =𝑀𝑤
𝑑−1∑
̃ 𝑚=0̂ 𝑒𝑤
𝑘𝑑,̃ 𝑚(̃ 𝑞𝑤
𝑘𝑑,̃ 𝑚) (22)
Now, the optimal trajectory, with index 𝑤∗from (17) gives the
agent’s chosen trajectory to the new waypoint:
𝑞𝑘𝑑+𝑗=𝑞∗
𝑘𝑑+𝑗,for𝑗= 1,…,𝐾∗
𝑑 (23)
Note that besides 𝑤∗, we employ superscript ‘‘*’’ to denote the optimal
solution for variables such as trajectories 𝐮∗
𝑑,𝐪∗
𝑑, and the length 𝐾∗
𝑑.
Recall that in Fig. 3, this optimal trajectory is highlighted in green.
Measurements (at red lines) are taken along this trajectory as follows:
if𝑘𝑚was the last prior measurement point to decision 𝑑, then:𝑘𝑚+1=
𝑘𝑑,0,𝑘𝑚+2=𝑘𝑑,1,…,𝑘𝑚+𝑀∗
𝑑=𝑘𝑑,𝑀∗
𝑑−1. Note that measurements are not
strictly periodic, since we enforce a measurement at each waypoint
𝑘𝑚+1=𝑘𝑑,0, even if the number of elapsed steps after the last measure-
ment is smaller than the period 𝛥. For simplicity, to contrast against
our event-triggered version below, we nevertheless call this setting
‘‘periodic’’. Both settings are referred to as ‘‘intermittent measurement’’
since we do not take measurements at all control steps.
The entire procedure is repeated at the next decision step 𝑑+ 1, at
discrete time step 𝑘𝑑+1=𝑘𝑑+𝐾∗
𝑑.
Taking measurements and running the filter takes energy and com-
putation time. To reduce these costs, we design an event-triggeredvariant of the method to allow the agent to take measurements only at
certain steps, instead of at a constant period. For consistency, we still
enforce measuring at each waypoint, for measurement index ̃ 𝑚= 0.
Then, the sensor’s smallest sampling period, 𝛥, serves as our starting
point. To decide whether to measure or not, at each potential measure-
ment step𝑘𝑑,̃ 𝑚for measurement index ̃ 𝑚≥1, we use the following
criterion:
𝐶𝑘𝑚∑
𝑐=1𝜋(𝜈𝑐
𝑘𝑚,𝑞𝑘𝑑,̃ 𝑚) +𝛾⋅𝑒(̃ 𝑞𝑘𝑑,̃ 𝑚)>𝛿 (24)
where𝛾is a tunable parameter and 𝛿is a threshold. We only measure
at𝑘𝑑,̃ 𝑚if (24) is satisfied. The intuition behind (24) is that we skip
measurements that are unlikely to contribute to either the refinement
of known targets – captured by the first term in (24) – or the explo-
ration of new locations along the trajectory – captured by the second
term in (24). The event-triggered method is only implemented during
actual execution, not at the planning stage. Note that the number of
actual measurements 𝑚is only incremented when (24) holds, and that
the clusters used in (24) are those found after processing the latest
measurement at 𝑘𝑚.
The overall procedure for Active target Search with Intermittent
measurements (ASI) is outlined in Algorithm 1.
Algorithm 1 Active target search with intermittent measurements
1:𝑑= −1, 𝑚= −1
2:foreach step𝑘≥0do
3: if𝑘= 0or trajectory finished ( 𝑘=𝑘𝑑+𝐾∗
𝑑)then
4: Planning:
5:𝑑=𝑑+ 1and𝑘𝑑=𝑘
6: configure candidates 𝑑= {𝑜𝑤
𝑑, 𝑤= 1,…, 𝑊}
7: foreach candidate index 𝑤do
8: compute C(𝑤)(18),T(𝑤)(19),E(𝑤)(22)
9: end for
10: find optimal next waypoint 𝑤∗by solving (17)
11: end if
12: if𝑘=𝑘𝑑+̃ 𝑚𝛥for somẽ 𝑚≥0and (̃ 𝑚= 0or (24) satisfied) then
13: Measurement:
14:𝑚=𝑚+ 1and𝑘𝑚=𝑘
15: get measurements, and remove those closest
to found targets per Section 3.3, leading to 𝑍𝑘𝑚
16: run filter from Section 3.1 with 𝑍𝑘𝑚
17: Filtering:
18: run K-means to get clusters 𝑐= 1,…, 𝐶𝑘𝑚with centers 𝜈𝑐
𝑘𝑚19: mark and delete found targets per Section 3.3.
20: end if
21: Control:
22: execute next trajectory step, from 𝑞𝑘to𝑞𝑘+1
23:end for
Remark 3. Compared to our prior work (Yousuf et al., 2024), the
optimization problem (17) additionally involves control cost. More
importantly, each term is now a summation with its own timescale:
control steps 𝑘in the control cost (18), and (potential) measurement
steps̃ 𝑚in the target refinement (19) and exploration (22). Furthermore,
the timescale of waypoint decisions 𝑑is different from those of both
control and measurement. Finally, the framework further allows us
to easily add the event-triggered mechanism (24) so that only some
measurements are taken.
5. Single-agent experiments
In this section, to validate the efficiency of the proposed target
search method, we present single-agent simulations involving a Parrot
Mambo drone in Section 5.1, together with a real-life experiment
involving the actual drone in Section 5.2.Control  Engineering  Practice  153 (2024)  106094  
7 
B. Yousuf et al.
5.1. Simulation results
To validate the efficiency of the proposed target search algorithm,
we ran two sets of simulations in 3D target space. In the first set of
simulations, we compare our novel ASI method against four baselines.
The first baseline is a standard lawnmower that covers the environment
uniformly. The second baseline is Active Search (AS) from our previous
paper ( Yousuf et al. , 2024 ). Unlike ASI, which navigates to arbitrarily
far away waypoints and takes multiple measurements along each tra-
jectory, AS optimizes at each planning step in a smaller set of waypoints
that are at a constant distance from the current position of the agent,
and only measures once it reaches the next waypoint. Furthermore, AS
does not consider control costs. The other two baselines are representa-
tive of the literature on active target search with intensity functions: a
planner that uses only MI without exploration, based on Dames and Ku-
mar (2015 ), and one with an unknown-target search component, based
on Sung and Tokekar (2022 ). The MI-only method uses only a target
refinement objective, without including an exploration objective. The
method of Sung and Tokekar (2022 ) represents the intensity function
as a Gaussian mixture, achieves target refinement by driving to the
closest Gaussian, and (in separate experiments) achieves target search
by driving to the widest Gaussian. A future research direction suggested
by Sung and Tokekar (2022 ) is to mix the two strategies. Here, like
in our earlier work ( Yousuf et al. , 2024 ), we adapt their method by
(1) applying it to the clusters instead of Gaussian components; and (2)
choosing a simple mix between search and refinement: the drone first
drives to the nearest cluster, then to the widest, then to the nearest,
and so on.
In the second simulation, we compare ASI with and without the
event-triggered measurement mechanism, to see whether it retains
its target detection performance with fewer measurements, and to
investigate how much the number of measurements can be reduced.
All experiments run in the 3D environment 𝐸= [0,260]m× [0,260]
m× [0,260] m. A number of 12targets are uniformly randomly dis-
tributed in the environment 𝐸. In ASI, we define the candidate set 𝑑
as a grid of positions of size 3 ×3×3 (27 different choices) in 𝐸, having
a spacing of 80 meters on each axis, and starting from [10,10,10]𝑇such
that the grid is centered in the environment. In the 3𝐷lawnmower
used as a baseline, the altitude difference on the 𝚉-axis between each
2D ‘‘layer’’ of the lawnmower is constant and set to 48 m, and the 𝚇
and 𝚈lawnmower spacings are also 48 m. The lawnmower also starts
at[10,10,10]𝑇. In contrast to ASI, in AS, six waypoints candidates are
defined at each step 𝑘, at a distance of 12m from the current position
along six directions: up, down, left, right, forward, and backward.
For simplicity, we use the linear model of a Parrot Mambo drone
from Sütő, Codrean, and Lendek (2023 ), as our objective is to evaluate
the performance of the planner, rather than that of the low-level
control. The drone model parameters are the moments of inertia on
each axis𝐼𝑥= 0.5829 ⋅10−4kg m2,𝐼𝑦= 0.7169 ⋅10−4kg m2,
𝐼𝑧= 1.000 ⋅10−4kg m2, and the mass 𝑚= 0.063kg. The agent’s
state𝑞𝑘∈ℜ12comprises the drone’s position in the north, east,
down (NED) frame, the roll, pitch, and yaw angles, and the linear
and angular velocities. The control signals 𝑢𝑘= [𝑢𝜙,𝑢𝜃,𝑢𝜓,𝑢𝑐𝑓]𝑇∈ℜ4
includes the torques on the three rotational axes and the collective
force. The control sampling period is 𝑇𝑠= 0.005s and the measure-
ment period is 𝛥= 10 times𝑇𝑠, i.e. 0.05 s. A discrete-time Linear
Quadratic Regulator (LQR) is designed to navigate the agent towards
the waypoints, specified as setpoints for the LQR. In the setpoints, the
angles and velocities are set to 0. The weight matrices are chosen as
𝑄LQR= diag([0.1,0.1,10,0.01,0.01,0.01,0.01,1,0.1,0.1,0.1]), and𝑅LQR=
diag([1
15,1000,1000,100]). The initial position of the drone is ̃ 𝑞0=
[1,1,1]𝑇for all the methods except the lawnmower, in which it is
[10,10,10]𝑇as explained above.
The probability of detection 𝜋(𝑥,𝑞)has form (3) with parameters:
𝐺= 0.98,𝙵𝚇=𝙵𝚈=𝙵𝚉= 25 . The measurement noise covariance
matrix in model (5) is determined through experimental tuning, and
Fig. 4. Comparison between alternative target search methods. The lawnmower per-
formance is shown with the blue continuous line, MI-only with the red dashed line, the
method adapted from Sung and Tokekar (2022 ) with the orange dotted line, AS with
the cyan dashed–dotted line, and ASI with the green dotted line. For each method,
the line is the mean number of targets found on the 10 maps, and the shaded region
gives a 95% confidence region on the mean. To make the figures easier to follow, the
correspondence between methods and colors is the same in all subsequent plots.
is𝑅= diag[1.5,0.175,0.295]. The threshold values for target marking
and removal are experimentally set as 𝑟= 1.1m,𝑚= 2.2m, and
𝑧= 5m. The experiment length is chosen so that all algorithms have
a chance to detect all the targets. For each experiment, we performed
10 independent runs and reported the mean number of targets detected
along with the 95% confidence interval on the mean.
Comparison of ASI to Baselines in the Case of Periodic Measurements.
Execution Time and Sensitivity Study. We start by comparing ASI to
the four baselines explained above: lawnmower, MI-only, the method
adapted from Sung and Tokekar (2022 ), and AS. For fairness, the
comparison is based on the number of measurement steps, and all
methods maintain a distance of roughly 12 m between consecutive
measurements (since in ASI measurements are time-based, the mea-
surement period is tuned so the average distance between measurement
points is 12 m).
The results in Fig. 4 show the number of target detections as
a function of the number of measurement steps. The proposed ASI
planner works better than all the baselines, followed in order by AS,
the method of Sung and Tokekar (2022 ), the lawnmower, and the MI-
only method. Notably, since this last method does not include any way
to search for new targets, it does not find all the targets, but focuses
only on those that happen to be detected. Moreover, all active-search
methods outperform the lawnmower.
Fig. 5 shows trajectories of all the methods in one of the 10
experiments, in the same order as in Fig. 4, and an extra trajectory
with ASI, when there are no targets. The lawnmower covers the 3D
environment uniformly. AS and ASI focus on relevant regions to find
targets faster. As opposed to AS, which only takes a single measurement
at each waypoint, the ASI planner generates longer trajectories that
include many measurements. The method adapted from Sung and
Tokekar (2022 ) also focuses on relevant regions so it is faster than the
lawnmower but slower than AS and ASI. Using ASI, the RMSE between
the actual and estimated target positions is 1.24 m, which is relatively
small for a domain of size of 2603m3. For a better understanding, please
refer to a video of an example trajectory with ASI, available online
at http://rocon.utcluj.ro/files/ASI_targetsearch.mp4 . The final, bottom-
right trajectory shows ASI in the case when there are no targets, to
illustrate that in such a case it fills the space in a lawnmower-like way,
which is correct behavior.
Regarding computation time, in order, the lawnmower takes
0.0043 ±0.00018 s per step, AS 0.018 ±0.0027 s, the method from Sung
and Tokekar (2022 ) 0.008 ±0.00054 s, the ASI algorithm 0.035 ±Control  Engineering  Practice  153 (2024)  106094  
8 
B. Yousuf et al.
Fig. 5. Examples of trajectories with the actual targets (black diamonds) and estimated
targets (red diamonds). Top left: Lawnmower. Top right: MI-only. Middle left: Method
adapted from Sung and Tokekar (2022 ). Middle right: AS. Bottom left: ASI. Bottom
right: ASI with no targets.
0.0021 s, and the MI-only algorithm 0.041 ±0.0018 s.4The format is
mean value ± 95% confidence half-interval on the mean, in the 10
experiments above (the same format will be used in the sequel). While
ASI is relatively computationally intensive, recall that in practice the
distance traveled by the real robot is the most significant cost, and ASI
is the fastest on that metric.
Next, we study the sensitivity of ASI with respect to the three
parameters deemed most important: weights 𝛼and𝛽in the planning
objective, and the number of particles. For each value or combination
of values, we perform 5 independent runs of ASI in the periodic-
measurement setting above. Table 1 shows that the best value for
both𝛼and𝛽is 0.75, and that ASI is moderately sensitive to these
parameters, with performance dropping on either side of the optimal
value but not very fast (recall that the next best method in Fig. 4
takes around 300 steps). For example, any combination of values in
0.5, 0.75, 2.5 leads to finding all the targets in at most 221 steps on
average, whereas the next best method in Fig. 4 takes around 300 steps.
Table 2 illustrates that performance reliably improves up to 10 000
particles and then plateaus. As expected, the filtering time increases
with the number of particles, while the planning time is largely constant
and therefore not shown in the table (e.g. for 2000 particles, it is
0.0263 ±0.0004 s and for 20 000, 0.0294 ±0.00088 s). Neither of these
execution times varied in the experiments of Table 1, so they were not
included there. Importantly, given the 0.05s measurement period, the
algorithm is applicable in real time up to 10 000 particles. Note that
the results of Table 1 were obtained with 10 000 particles, and those of
Table 2 with𝛼=𝛽= 0.75. These best settings were also used to obtain
the results of Fig. 4 and 5, as well as all the single-agent results in the
sequel.
4The computer used is equipped with an Intel 1365U CPU, 32 GB of RAM,
and runs Matlab R2024.Table 1
Effect of𝛼and𝛽parameters on the number of steps taken by ASI to find all the
targets.
𝛼𝛽0.05 0.5 0.75 2.5 5
0.05 153±6 171±8 182±10 167±9 248±12
0.5 173±7 155±10 184±12 200±7 233±10
0.75 177±6 151±10 117±11 182±13 241±10
2.5 242±8 221±10 183±10 151±6 267±12
5 359±10 329±8 286±7 259±12 375±10
Table 2
The effect of the number of particles on ASI. Results include the number
of measurement steps required to find all targets (in regular font),
together with the computation time taken by filtering (in bold).
Number of particles Number of steps
Filtering time
2000278±8 steps
0.0006 ±0.00002 s
4000250 ±10 steps
0.0009 ±0.000052 s
6000212 ±12 steps
0.0021 ±0.00062 s
8000167±6 steps
0.0057 ±0.00088 s
10000117±11 steps
0.0083 ±0.00021 s
15000114±9 steps
0.0564 ±0.00981 s
20000113±10 steps
0.11264 ±0.0867 s
Fig. 6. Comparison between periodic measurement (light green continuous line) and
event-triggered measurements (dark green continuous line): targets found over time.
Event-triggered Measurements. Next, we implemented the event-
triggered mechanism from the end of Section 4. The threshold 𝛿is
set to 4, tuned experimentally. Fig. 6 shows the number of target
detections, this time as a function of the number of control steps. By
using the event-triggered measurement mechanism, the target detection
performance of the algorithm is statistically indistinguishable from
the periodic case, but the number of measurements is reduced with
statistical significance: on average in the 10experiments, the drone took
100 ± 10 measurement steps in the event-triggered case, compared to
145±17 in the periodic case. This means that fewer measurements must
be processed and the PHD filter update equations are run fewer times,
leading to computational and possibly communication savings.
Fig. 7 (top) shows a trajectory of the original ASI where the drone
takes measurements along the trajectory periodically, highlighting
these measurements. Fig. 7 (bottom) shows a trajectory of the event-
triggered ASI. Measurements are rarer than in the periodic case, andControl  Engineering  Practice  153 (2024)  106094  
9 
B. Yousuf et al.
Fig. 7. Examples of trajectories with periodic sampling (top) and event-triggered
sampling (bottom). The positions from which the robot measures are shown as red
circles.
they are also taken at widely varying distances, as needed to improve
target detection.
5.2. Real-drone results
As a final piece of the single-agent part of the paper, real-life
implementation results using a Parrot Mambo drone are given. We
again compare our new ASI framework to AS and a lawnmower.
For this experiment, the problem is reduced to a 2D search, with
the targets on the floor and the drone flying at a constant altitude of
1 m to maintain the same FOV. The 2D environment is [0,2] × [0,2]m,
and the targets are represented by blue markers, see Fig. 8 (top).
We consider 12 targets manually placed at arbitrary locations. The
candidate waypoints of the drone 𝑑are defined as a 3 ×3 grid
having a spacing of 0.6 meters on both the 𝚇and 𝚈axis and the
corner at [0.1,0.1], so the grid is centered in the environment. The 𝚇
and 𝚈lawnmower spacings are set to 0.2 m. Up to 120s are allocated
to complete each experiment. The threshold values for target marking
and removal are experimentally set as 𝑊= 0.02m,𝑚= 0.04m, and
𝑧= 0.05m.
The drone communicates with MATLAB via Bluetooth to receive
waypoints and send target measurements. The low-level controller
operates in a closed loop on the drone. The pictures taken by the
drone-mounted camera are fed into an image-processing algorithm for
marker identification and localization. For details on the experimental
framework, including the image processing algorithm, communication
protocol, and controller, please refer to Yousuf et al. (2024 ).
The detection probability, unlike in the simulations, is now binary
(i.e, a deterministic detection model is used):
𝜋(𝑥,𝑞) ={
1𝑥∈
0𝑥∉(25)
where = [𝚇𝑞− 0.2,𝚇𝑞+ 0.2] × [ 𝚈𝑞− 0.2,𝚈𝑞+ 0.2]is the drone camera’s
field of view at a 1 m altitude, illustrated in Fig. 8 (bottom). Here, 𝚇𝑞,𝚈𝑞
is the 2D position of the drone. Target measurements consist of range
and bearing. To determine the measurement covariance 𝑅, we collected
Fig. 8. Top Parrot Mambo minidrone searching for targets (blue markers). Bottom:
Field of view of the Parrot Mambo and the TurtleBot. The latter robot will be used in
the multi-agent experiments of Section 7.2.
100 images of a single target at different positions in the camera image,
and then calculated the empirical covariance of the target positioning
errors, obtaining 𝑅= diag[0.016,0.052].
Note that in reality, due to model uncertainty, the optimal predicted
trajectory 𝐪∗
𝑑will be different from the actual trajectory achieved by
implementing the closed-loop onboard controller of the drone. Even
though our notation overlooks this difference for simplicity, the actual
measurements are taken along the real path, and the PHD filter uses
the actual drone states (up to pose estimation errors).
Fig. 9 (top), shows the number of target detections as a function
of the number of measurements, for ASI together with the lawnmower
and AS baselines. ASI works best, followed by AS and the lawnmower,
thereby confirming the results seen in the simulations. Fig. 9 (bottom),
illustrates the trajectory for ASI. The drone finds all the targets with
an RMSE between the actual and estimated target locations of 0.08 m,
which is small compared to the environment size. Note that there
is some drift because we rely on the onboard sensors. A video of
the experiment is available at http://rocon.utcluj.ro/files/ASI_mambo.
mp4.
6. Multi-agent planner
In this second part of the paper, we consider the problem of design-
ing a fast target search path for multiple agents , in a framework that we
call Multi-Agent Active Target Search with Intermittent Measurements
(MAASI).
Similarly to the set 𝑘of agents that measure at step 𝑘, see
Section 3.2, define 𝑘as the set of indices of the agents that planat𝑘.
An agent𝑎must plan at 𝑘if its previously planned trajectory has just
finished. All other agents 𝑎∉𝑘continue their trajectories. Initially,
0consists of all the agents, while at other steps, it can consist of any
subset of agents, including the whole set if all the agents happen to
finish their earlier trajectories simultaneously. Set 𝑘may also oftenControl  Engineering  Practice  153 (2024)  106094  
10 
B. Yousuf et al.
Fig. 9. Top: Detected number of targets using the real Parrot Mambo minidrone.
Bottom: ASI trajectory in a real experiment. The same color correspondence as in Fig. 4
applies. In addition to the trajectory, actual and estimated targets, drone waypoints are
shown as pink stars.
be empty, implying that no planning is needed and all agents continue
their existing trajectory.
An agent𝑎∈𝑘is at its𝑑𝑎th decision and has a set of next waypoint
candidates 𝑎
𝑑𝑎={𝑜𝑤𝑎
𝑑𝑎,𝑤𝑎= 1,…,𝑊𝑎}. Note that, although agents
may be at different decision indices (e.g., agent 1 at 𝑑1= 3, agent 2
at𝑑2= 2, etc.), the time step of these synchronous decisions is the
same:𝑘=𝑘𝑑𝑎for all𝑎∈𝑘.
The joint candidate index is 𝐰𝑘∈⨉
𝑎∈𝑘{1,…,𝑊𝑎}, where⨉
denotes cross product, i.e. 𝐰𝑘is a vector consisting of one candidate
index𝑤𝑎for each agent 𝑎∈𝑘. As in the single-agent planner of
Section 4, each candidate waypoint 𝑜𝑤𝑎
𝑑𝑎of each agent 𝑎∈𝑘is fed as a
reference point to the low-level controller of agent 𝑎, which generates
the predicted agent trajectory 𝐪𝑤𝑎
𝑑𝑎of length𝐾𝑤𝑎
𝑑𝑎and the corresponding
control input sequence 𝐮𝑤𝑎
𝑑𝑎. Note that to simplify the notation, we use
e.g.𝐪𝑤𝑎
𝑑𝑎instead of the full form 𝐪𝑎,𝑤𝑎
𝑑𝑎, since the agent index is already
declared in 𝑤𝑎and𝑑𝑎.
A centralized planner is run to find an optimal next joint waypoint
for all planning agents 𝑎∈𝑘:
𝐰∗
𝑘= argmax𝐰𝑘∑
𝑎∈𝑘𝐽𝑎(𝑤𝑎) (26)
where𝐽𝑎(𝑤𝑎)is the objective function of agent 𝑎∈𝑘, defined similarly
to (17):
𝐽𝑎(𝑤𝑎) =−C𝑎(𝑤𝑎) +𝛼T𝑎(𝑤𝑎) +𝛽E𝑎(𝑤𝑎)
𝐾𝑤𝑎
𝑑𝑎(27)
andC𝑎,T𝑎, and E𝑎are the cost, target refinement, and exploration
components. These components extend the single-agent versions (18),
(19), and (22) as follows.
The control cost to waypoint candidate 𝑜𝑤𝑎
𝑑𝑎for agent𝑎is defined as:
C𝑎(𝑤𝑎) =𝐾𝑤𝑎
𝑑𝑎−1∑
𝑗=0(𝑢𝑤𝑎
𝑘𝑑𝑎+𝑗)𝑇⋅𝑢𝑤𝑎
𝑘𝑑𝑎+𝑗(28)
The target refinement is computed as the sum of the observation
probabilities of agent 𝑎at the particle cluster centers, summed overthe predicted measurement steps of agent 𝑎:
T𝑎(𝑤𝑎) =𝑀𝑤𝑎
𝑑𝑎−1∑
̃ 𝑚=0𝐶𝑘𝑑𝑎∑
𝑐=1𝜋𝑎(𝜈𝑐
𝑘𝑑𝑎,𝑞𝑤𝑎
𝑘𝑑𝑎,̃ 𝑚) (29)
where𝑀𝑤𝑎
𝑑𝑎is the total number of measurements (including at the
starting step) along the agent’s candidate trajectory 𝐪𝑤𝑎, and𝑘𝑑𝑎,̃ 𝑚, ̃ 𝑚=
0,…,𝑀𝑤𝑎
𝑑𝑎− 1are the steps when measurements should be taken by
agent𝑎. Note that we work with the clusters available at step 𝑘𝑑𝑎,
the same for all planning agents. As can be seen in (28) and (29),
given the clusters, C𝑎andT𝑎are computed independently for each
agent. This is not the case for the exploration component E𝑎(𝑤𝑎): the
agents remain coupled via this component. Let us first generalize the
exploration function 𝑒. This function is initialized in the same way as
for a single agent in Section 4, 𝑒0(𝑥𝑙) = 1 at all points 𝑥𝑙on a grid .
Then, at each step 𝑘:
𝑒𝑘(𝑥𝑙) =𝑒𝑘−1(𝑥𝑙)∏
𝑎∈𝑘(1 −𝜋𝑎(𝑥𝑙,𝑞𝑎
𝑘))∀𝑙∈ (30)
i.e.,𝑒is decreased according to the probability of detection by all the
agents𝑎∈𝑘. By convention, the product in (30) is equal to 1 when
𝑘= ∅, so when no agents measure, 𝑒stays constant.
The exploration component of agent 𝑎is then:
E𝑎(𝑤𝑎) =𝑀𝑤𝑎
𝑑𝑎−1∑
̃ 𝑚=0̂ 𝑒𝐰𝑘
𝑘𝑑𝑎,̃ 𝑚(̃ 𝑞𝑤𝑎
𝑘𝑑𝑎,̃ 𝑚) (31)
wherê 𝑒𝐰𝑘
𝑘is a predicted version of 𝑒𝑘(𝑥𝑙):
̂ 𝑒𝐰𝑘
𝑘(𝑥𝑙) =̂ 𝑒𝐰𝑘
𝑘−1(𝑥𝑙)∏
𝑎∈𝐰𝑘
𝑘(1 −𝜋𝑎(𝑥𝑙,𝑞𝑎,𝐰𝑘
𝑘))(32)
In (32), 𝐰𝑘
𝑘is the predicted set of measuring agents at step 𝑘if
the planning agents 𝑘were to select joint index 𝐰𝑘. Function ̂ 𝑒𝐰𝑘
depends both on the predicted trajectories 𝑞𝑎,𝐰𝑘
𝑘of agents𝑎∈𝑘,
which are directly determined by the indices 𝑤𝑎in the joint index 𝐰𝑘;
and on the predicted trajectories 𝑞𝑎,𝐰𝑘
𝑘of the other, continuing agents
𝑎∉𝑘. The predicted states 𝑞𝑎,𝐰𝑘
𝑘, the predicted sets of measuring
agents 𝐰𝑘
𝑘, and therefore the predicted exploration function ̂ 𝑒𝐰𝑘
𝑘, all
depend on the candidate joint waypoint 𝐰𝑘. Note that, with an abuse
of notation, we use index 𝐰𝑘even for the trajectories of non-planning
(continuing) agents 𝑎∉𝑘, because the trajectories of these agents may
be completed in different ways for different joint waypoint indices 𝐰𝑘,
as explained next.
The planner must predict some trajectories for the continuing agents
𝑎∉𝑘. Each such agent will continue executing the remaining tail of its
current trajectory, and this tail goes into the first part of the predicted
trajectory. Define now the maximal length of the predicted trajectories
of planning agents, max𝑎∈𝑘𝐾𝑤𝑎
𝑑𝑎. Some trajectory tails of continuing
agents will be shorter than this maximal length; this issue is solved by
appending constant states, equal to the last state, to each such agent’s
trajectory. The same is done for trajectories of planning agents that are
shorter than the maximal length (e.g. because the waypoint is close).
Once the optimal index 𝐰∗
𝑘is determined, real agent trajectories to
the new waypoints are produced, similarly to the single-agent planner
in Section 4. Along the way, agents measure and IC-PHD is applied as
in Section 3.2.
Fig. 10 illustrates the framework. In this example, we have two
agents𝑎= 1,2that are shown with green and purple trajectories,
respectively, and ×-shaped outlines are the decision steps, with the
decision indices 𝑑𝑎. When both agents are at their initial decision,
i.e.𝑑1=𝑑2= 0,𝑘=0= {1,2}since𝑘= 0, and the two agents
jointly plan their next waypoints. The agents again happen to perform
joint planning at decision indices 𝑑1= 3and𝑑2= 2, which correspond
to the same discrete time step of 𝑘=𝑘1
𝑑=𝑘2
𝑑, so that 𝑘= {1,2}. At
other decision indices, either agent 1 chooses its waypoint, 𝑘= {1} ,
or agent 2 does, 𝑘= {2} . For instance, at decision index 𝑑1= 1, onlyControl  Engineering  Practice  153 (2024)  106094  
11 
B. Yousuf et al.
Fig. 10. Illustration of multi-agent active target search with intermittent measurements.
agent𝑎= 1performs planning, and 𝐰𝑘=𝑤1. In this case, we use the
existing trajectory ‘‘tail’’ of agent 𝑎= 2, indicated by a thick purple line,
to apply (32). Since this tail is too short in this specific case, we extend
it using constant states, which are represented by a dashed purple line.
At decision index 𝑑2= 1we follow a similar procedure for agent 2,
with 𝐰𝑘=𝑤2. In this case, the ‘‘tail’’ of agent 𝑎= 1used to plan is
shown as a thick green line and is supplemented with constant states
illustrated by a green dashed line.
Finally, we adapt our event-triggered approach from Section 4,
introduced there for single-agent scenarios, to accommodate multiple
agents. For each agent 𝑎, we will use an auxiliary measurement index
̃ 𝑚≥0, so that the interval passing since the last decision step 𝑘𝑑𝑎
is a multiple ̃ 𝑚of the measurement period 𝛥𝑎. In other words, 𝑘=
𝑘𝑑𝑎+̃ 𝑚𝛥𝑎=∶𝑘𝑑𝑎,̃ 𝑚. At waypoints, when ̃ 𝑚= 0, agent𝑎always measures,
so it gets added to the measuring set 𝑘. For̃ 𝑚>0,𝑎is added to 𝑘
only if the following multi-agent extension of (24) holds:
𝐶𝑘∑
𝑐=1𝜋𝑎(𝜈𝑐
𝑘,𝑞𝑎
𝑘𝑑𝑎,̃ 𝑚) +𝛾⋅𝑒𝑘(̃ 𝑞𝑎
𝑘𝑑𝑎,̃ 𝑚)>𝛿 (33)
The parameters 𝛾,𝛿in (33) have the same meaning as in Section 4.
Therefore, in Fig. 10 we no longer automatically take measurements at
all red lines, but only at those red lines where (33) is satisfied.
To exemplify, let us return to the two-agent scenario of Fig. 10.
Initially, agents are at decision indices 𝑑1=𝑑2= 0. At this point,
both agents must take measurements: 0= {1,2}. Consider next as
an example a step 𝑘at which both agents would have measured in the
periodic setting. In the event-triggered case, at such a step 𝑘,𝑘can
be either ∅,{1},{2}, or{1,2}, depending on whether condition (33) is
satisfied by no agent, by agent 1, by agent 2, or by both agents.
The overall MAASI method is summarized in Algorithm 2.
Remark 4. Similarly to the single-agent case of Section 4, the main
difference between the new planner and our prior work in Yousuf
et al. (2023 ) is that in the new planner different timescales are used
for waypoint decisions, control, and measurements. This has nontrivial
implications on the planner, e.g. notably on how the objectives of
different agents interact. Decision and measurement timescales can also
differ among agents, but we choose to keep control timescales the sameAlgorithm 2 Multi-agent active target search with intermittent
measurements
1:𝑑𝑎= −1 ∀𝑎
2:foreach step𝑘≥0do
3: 𝑘= ∅
4: Planning:
5: foreach𝑎do
6: if𝑎finished its trajectory ( 𝑘=𝑘𝑑𝑎+𝐾∗,𝑎
𝑑𝑎)then
7: 𝑑𝑎=𝑑𝑎+ 1and𝑘𝑑𝑎=𝑘
8: 𝑘=𝑘∪ {𝑎}
9: end if
10: end for
11: if𝑘≠∅then
12: foreach joint index w𝑘and𝑎∈𝑘do
13: findC𝑎(𝑤𝑎)(28),T𝑎(𝑤𝑎)(29),E𝑎(𝑤𝑎)(31)
14: find𝐽𝑎(𝑤𝑎)(27)
15: end for
16: find best next joint waypoint w∗
𝑘by solving (26)
17: end if
18: Measurement:
19: 𝑘= ∅
20: forall𝑎do
21: if𝑘=𝑘𝑑𝑎+̃ 𝑚𝛥𝑎for̃ 𝑚≥0and (̃ 𝑚= 0or (33) satisfied) then
22: 𝑘=𝑘⋃{𝑎}
23: get measurements, and remove those closest
to found targets per Section 3.3, leading to 𝑍𝑎
𝑘
24: end if
25: end for
26: Filtering:
27: run filter from Section 3.2 with 𝑘and𝑍𝑎
𝑘,𝑎∈𝑘
28: execute K-means to find clusters 𝑐= 1,…, 𝐶𝑘with centers 𝜈𝑐
𝑘
29: mark and delete any found targets, per Section 3.3
30: Control:
31: execute the next step of all agents’ trajectories
32:end forControl  Engineering  Practice  153 (2024)  106094  
12 
B. Yousuf et al.
to avoid complicating the notation. The framework then allows us to
easily add per-agent event-triggered measurement rules.
7. Multi-agent results
In this section, we present MAASI simulations in Section 7.1 and
real-life experiments involving a Parrot Mambo drone and a Robotis
TurtleBot3 ground robot in Section 7.2.
7.1. Simulation results
Section 7.1.1 presents results using homogeneous agents in a 3D
environment. We evaluate the performance of MAASI versus multiagent
versions of the two baselines that worked best in the single-agent case:
a multiagent version of the method adapted from Sung and Tokekar
(2022 ), in which the agents compute waypoints independently like in
Section 5.1, but run the IC-PHD filter jointly; and Multi-Agent Active
Search (MAAS) from our previous paper ( Yousuf et al. , 2023 ). The
differences between MAASI and MAAS mirror those between ASI and
AS: MAASI navigates to potentially faraway waypoints and acquires
multiple measurements along the trajectories of the agents, whereas
MAAS defines for each agent a set of waypoint candidates at a constant
distance from its current position, and only takes measurements once
agents reach the next waypoints. Additionally, MAAS does not involve
asynchronous decision-making, as agents reach the waypoints simulta-
neously. Note that most multi-agent methods in the literature ( Chen
& Dames , 2022 ; Dames , 2020 ; Dames & Kumar , 2015 ; Ivić, 2022 ; Lin
& Goodrich , 2014 ; Zhou et al. , 2019 ) are MI-only, and it would make
little sense to compare them since we expect that they fail in the same
way as the MI-only method in the single-agent case: they will not find
all the targets.
In Section 7.1.2 , still with homogeneous agents, we compare MAASI
with and without the event-triggered measurement mechanism.
Finally, in Section 7.1.3 , we consider heterogeneous agents navigat-
ing a 2D space in a simulated version of the real experiment that will
follow in Section 7.2. To make the problem more challenging, obstacles
are added in Section 7.1.3 .
7.1.1. Homogeneous-agent results with periodic measurements. Execution
time and sensitivity study
Two agents (drones) search for 12 targets in the 3𝐷environ-
ment𝐸= [0,260]m×[0,260]m×[0,260]m. The following settings are the
same as in the single-agent case of Section 5, but now apply to both
agents:
•The candidate waypoints for each agent is a centered 3 ×3×3
grid of positions with a spacing of 80 m on each axis, with the
corner at [10,10,10]𝑇.
•The linear Parrot Mambo drone model.
•The form (3) of the probability of detection and its parameters
𝐺= 0.98,𝙵𝚇=𝙵𝚈=𝙵𝚉= 25.
•The sensor noise covariance matrix 𝑅= diag[1.5,0.175,0.295], and
the threshold values are 𝑟= 1.1m,𝑚= 2.2m, and 𝑧= 5m.
•In MAAS, the waypoints of each agent are generated in the same
way as in AS, see Section 5.
The initial positions are ̃ 𝑞1
0= [1,1,1]𝑇for the first agent (like the
drone in the single-agent experiment) and ̃ 𝑞2
0= [250,250,250]𝑇for the
second agent, (in the opposite corner of the environment). For fairness,
like in the single-agent case, we compare MAASI and MAAS based on
the number of measurement steps. The measurements are taken for
MAASI and MAAS in the same way as for ASI and AS in Section 5. The
MAASI control sampling period is 𝑇𝑎
𝑠= 0.005s and the measurement
period is𝛥𝑎= 10 for both agents. We performed 10 independent runs
for each experiment and reported the mean number of targets detected
along with the 95% confidence on the mean. Fig. 11 shows that MAASi
outperforms the two baselines and finds targets with good accuracy.
Fig. 11. Top: Comparison between alternative target search methods in the multi-agent
case: The performance of the method from Sung and Tokekar (2022 ) is shown by the
orange dotted line, MAAS is shown with the cyan continuous line, and MAASI with the
green dashed line. For each method, the line is the mean number of targets found in the
10 runs, and the shaded region gives the 95% confidence region on the mean. Bottom:
MAASI trajectory with the actual targets (black diamonds) and estimated targets (red
diamonds).
Table 3
Effect of𝛼and𝛽parameters on the number of steps taken by MAASI to find all
targets.
𝛼𝛽0.05 0.5 0.75 2.5 5
0.05 148±10 124±8 118±12 164±12 195±10
0.5 133±8 104±10 128±8 162±14 188±12
0.75 174±12 157±14 133±8 177±7 203±10
2.5 193±8 181±12 162±10 181±7 193±12
5 235±10 206±14 176±10 187±12 202±14
As in Section 5.1, we study next computation time and sensitivity to
parameters. In the simulations above, in order, the method from Sung
and Tokekar (2022 ) takes 0.014 ±0.0056 s per step, MAAS 0.022
±0.0079 s, and MAASI 0.046 ±0.0034 s.5This ordering is similar to
that in the single-agent case.
Regarding sensitivity, Table 3 shows that the best value for both 𝛼
and𝛽is 0.5, slightly smaller than in the single-agent case, and exhibits
similar, moderate drops in performance around the optimal value. In
Table 4, execution times and performance evolve like in the single-
agent case. In particular, performance plateaus after the same number
of particles, 10 000, because the complexity of the intensity functions
to be represented does not change. The results of Table 3 were obtained
with 10 000 particles, and those of Table 4 with𝛼=𝛽= 0.5. These best
settings were also used to obtain the results of Fig. 11, as well as all
the multi-agent results in the sequel.
7.1.2. Homogeneous agents with event-triggered measurements
Next, in the same setting as above, we implement the event-
triggered mechanism from the end of Section 6. We reuse the single-
agent threshold value 𝛿= 4from Section 5.
5The computer used is the same one as before (Intel 1365U CPU, 32 GB
RAM, Matlab R2024).Control  Engineering  Practice  153 (2024)  106094  
13 
B. Yousuf et al.
Table 4
The effect of the number of particles on MAASI.
Number of particles Number of steps
Filtering time
2000193±12 steps
0.0009 ±0.000072 s
4000166 ±8 steps
0.0028 ±0.0023 s
6000151±10 steps
0.0067 ±0.0042 s
8000122±14 steps
0.0091 ±0.0047 s
10000104±8 steps
0.0123 ±0.0078 s
15000102±10 steps
0.0744 ±0.0176 s
20000101±14 steps
0.144 ±0.0893 s
Fig. 12. Comparison between MAASI with periodic measurements (light green
continuous line) and event-triggered measurements (dark green continuous line).
Fig. 12 shows the number of target detections as a function of the
number of control steps, which is now fair since we no longer compare
to methods that measure only at waypoints. Like in the single-agent
case, by using the event-triggered measurement mechanism, the target
detection performance of the algorithm is statistically indistinguishable
from the performance in the periodic case. On the other hand, on aver-
age across the 10experiments, the sum of the number of measurements
taken by the two drones is 81±10 in the event-triggered case, compared
to104 ± 17 in the periodic case. The mean number of measurements is
reduced, but the advantage is less clear than in the single-agent case
since the two confidence intervals overlap.
7.1.3. Heterogeneous agents with periodic measurements
Next, we test the performance of MAASI in a scenario motivated
by our ongoing SeaClear2.0 project: https://www.seaclear2.eu/ , where
two different robots search for seafloor litter: a drone and a remotely
operated underwater vehicle (ROV).
In this paper, we use a Parrot Mambo drone for agent 1, but instead
of the ROV, we use a TurtleBot 3 ground robot for agent 2, with a
different velocity and sensor model from the drone. We obtain in this
way a simulation version of the real experiment presented in the next
section. To match that experiment, the environment is now 2𝐷, equal
to[−0.3,2.4]m× [−0.3,2.4]m. A number of 12 targets are distributed
uniformly in 𝐸.
Agent 1 (Parrot Mambo) remains the same as in Section 7.1.1 –7.1.2 ,
but now it flies at a constant 1m altitude above the ground. Addition-
ally, we used a unicycle robot model ( Khoukhi & Shahab , 2013 ) for
agent 2 (TurtleBot). Agent 2’s states 𝑞2∈ℜ3contain the position in𝚇and 𝚈coordinates, along with the heading angle. Its control signal
contains linear and angular velocities: 𝑢2= [𝑢𝑣,𝑢𝜔]. We used a discrete-
time feedback controller developed by Khoukhi and Shahab (2013 ) to
navigate with agent 2 towards the waypoints, and also to control the
heading angle to a constant reference in the direction of travel from
the previous waypoint to the current one.
To make the problem more challenging, four circular obstacles of
various sizes are placed manually at arbitrary locations, and obstacle
avoidance is performed with the method from Yousuf et al. (2024 )
where the threshold on the distance between each agent and the
obstacle nearest to it is set to 0.12 m and the obstacle avoidance gain
to 0.002.
For MAASI, the set of the waypoints candidate set is a 3 ×3 grid of
positions in the environment 𝐸for the drone, with a spacing of 0.6 m
on each axis. The initial position of the drone is set as [0.1; 0.1]. In
contrast, the candidate set for the TurtleBot is a grid of positions of
size 8 ×8 with a spacing of 0.25 m on each axis. The TurtleBot is
initialized at [0; 0]. For each agent in MAAS, we used a candidate set
having 4 different choices at a constant distance of 0.25 m from the
current position in the 4 cardinal directions.
For the probability of detection, we once again used (3) from
Section 2 with parameters: 𝐺1=𝐺2= 0.98,𝙵1
𝚇=𝙵1
𝚈= 0.3, and 𝙵2
𝚇=
𝙵2
𝚈= 0.15. Thus, the FOV of agent 1 is larger than that of agent 2, and
agent 1 is also faster. However, the sensor of agent 2 is slightly more
precise, as shown by the covariances matrices 𝑅1= diag[0.016,0.052]
and𝑅2= diag[0.011,0.0311] . The values of the covariance matrices
come from the upcoming real experiment in Section 7.2.6The threshold
values for target marking and removal are experimentally set as 𝑊=
0.02m,𝑚= 0.04m, and 𝑧= 0.05m.
Fig. 13 (top) shows the number of targets detected as a function
of the number of measurement steps summed up across both agents.
As for homogeneous agents before, MAASI works faster than MAAS,
and both algorithms find all the targets. Fig. 13 (bottom) shows the
agents searching for the targets while avoiding the obstacles. The drone
explores the environment faster than the TurtleBot.
7.2. Experimental results
Next, MAASI is implemented in a real-life scenario similar to the
simulations of Section 7.1.3 , using a Parrot Mambo drone together with
a TurtleBot3. We placed 12 blue markers (targets) manually on the floor
at arbitrary locations, as seen in Fig. 14. We conducted a comparison
between MAASI, MAAS, and a lawnmower version for multiple agents.
First, we explain the setup of the experiments, and then we delve into
the results.
To enable the simultaneous control of two robots, each with a
distinct software architecture, we designed a heterogeneous framework
using Matlab, ROS (Robot Operating System), and Bluetooth commu-
nication. For the Parrot Mambo framework, please refer to Section 5.2.
The planner interfaces with the TurtleBot via ROS. Pictures are taken
by the camera mounted on the TurtleBot, which are fed into an image
processing algorithm for marker identification and localization via seg-
mentation. The majority of segmentation, estimation, and planning for
the TurtleBot are executed on the host computer. A waypoint command
is dispatched to the TurtleBot. Continuous control of the robot’s actions
is achieved using the dynamic window algorithm ( Liu, Yao, Chen,
Huang, Xu, Wang, & Guo , 2021 ).
The detection probability, unlike in the simulations, is now binary
like in Section 5.2 before:
𝜋𝑎(𝑥,𝑞𝑎) ={
1𝑥∈𝑎
0𝑥∉𝑎(34)
6Just like in the single-agent experiment ofSection 5.2, but now for both
agents, we collected 100 images of a single target at different positions in
the camera images, then calculated the empirical covariance of target position
error.Control  Engineering  Practice  153 (2024)  106094  
14 
B. Yousuf et al.
Fig. 13. Top: Comparison between MAASI and MAAS for heterogeneous robots, with
obstacles. MAASI is represented by a green continuous line, and MAAS by a cyan
dashed line. Bottom: Trajectories of the two agents with MAASI.
Fig. 14. Parrot Mambo minidrone and TurtleBot searching for targets (blue markers).
For the drone, the FOV is 1= [𝚇1−0.2,𝚇1+0.2]×[ 𝚈1−0.2,𝚈1+0.2]and
for the TurtleBot it is 2= [𝚇2− 0.1,𝚇2+ 0.2] × [ 𝚈2− 0.1,𝚈2+ 0.2]. Thus,
the TurtleBot’s FOV is off-center, as shown earlier in Fig. 8 (bottom).
For MAASI, we use the candidate waypoint grids from Section 7.1.3 ,
and for MAAS we use the candidate set from Section 7.1.3 . For all
methods, the two agents start their motion from opposite corners:
the drone from [1.9,1.9]𝑇, maintaining a constant altitude of 1m, and
the TurtleBot from [0,0]𝑇. The lawnmowers of the two agents have a
spacing of 0.25 m on both the 𝚇and 𝚈axes and meet in the middle.
Similarly to the lawnmower, for MAASI and MAAS, the two agents start
their motion simultaneously from opposite corners of the environment.
The empirical covariances we found are 𝑅1= diag[0.016,0.052]for the
drone and 𝑅2= diag[0.011,0.0311] for the TurtleBot. The threshold
values for target marking and removal are experimentally set as 𝑊=
0.02m,𝑚= 0.04m, and 𝑧= 0.05m.
At the start of each experiment, both agents simultaneously gen-
erate waypoints. However, due to limited battery life and Bluetooth
connectivity, the drone is unable to search for the full length of the
experiment. When the drone trajectory finishes, the TurtleBot switches
from MAASI to ASI to find the remaining targets.
Fig. 15. Top: Detected number of targets using the Parrot Mambo minidrone and the
TurtleBot in real experiments. Bottom: Trajectories of the two agents with MAASI.
With these settings, we compare the number of detected targets
MAASI framework with MAAS and the lawnmower. The results in
Fig. 15 (top) show the target detection as a function of the number
of measurement steps summed up across both agents. Fig. 15 (bottom)
shows the real agents searching for the targets. MAASI performs best,
with the agents finding all targets the fastest; followed by MAAS and
then by the lawnmower. These relationships are similar both to those
in the single-agent real-robot results and to those in the multi-agent
simulations.
A video of the real-life experiment is available at http://rocon.
utcluj.ro/files/MAASI_mambo_turtlebot.mp4 . In the video, in the mid-
dle of the experiment at 3 min and 30 s, the drone finishes its trajectory,
and the TurtleBot finds the rest of the targets alone, as discussed
previously.
8. Conclusion
We introduced a framework for multi-agent active target search that
aims to quickly find an unknown number of static targets at unknown
locations. The framework works in 3D or 2D, for homogeneous or
heterogeneous agents, as well as for a single agent; accommodates
asynchronous planning and measurements by agents in the team; and
allows each agent to optionally only take measurements when they
are expected to improve target detection. Simulations and real-life
experiments illustrated better performance than several representative
baselines.
Our solution has a few limitations that need to be addressed in fu-
ture work. The experiments were conducted indoors, and running them
outdoors presents significant new challenges, such as detecting targets
in adverse weather conditions. Additionally, our algorithm relies on
knowing the robots’ poses; joint filtering of target and pose measure-
ments, as described by Mahler (2007 ), can be performed to address
pose uncertainty. Moreover, future research could explore applying the
technique in the field to search for ocean litter using a combination of
aerial, surface, and underwater robots. One of the key challenges in
this scenario will be devising appropriate sensor models for each type
of robot.Control  Engineering  Practice  153 (2024)  106094  
15 
B. Yousuf et al.
CRediT authorship contribution statement
Bilal Yousuf: Writing – original draft, Visualization, Validation,
Software, Resources, Methodology, Formal analysis, Data curation,
Conceptualization. Radu Herzal: Software, Validation, Visualization.
Zsófia Lendek: Writing – review & editing, Supervision, Method-
ology. Lucian Buşoniu: Writing – review & editing, Supervision,
Methodology, Project administration, Funding acquisition.
Declaration of competing interest
The authors declare that they have no known competing finan-
cial interests or personal relationships that could have appeared to
influence the work reported in this paper.
References
Aguilar, G., Bravo, L., Ruiz, U., Murrieta-Cid, R., & Chavez, E. (2019). A distributed
algorithm for exploration of unknown environments with multiple robots. Journal
of Intelligent and Robotics Systems ,95(3), 1021–1040.
Berger, J., & Lo, N. (2015). An innovative multi-agent search-and-rescue path planning
approach. Computers & Operations Research ,53, 24–31.
Bircher, A., Kamel, M. S., Alexis, K., Oleynikova, H., & Siegwart, R. (2018). Receding
horizon path planning for 3D exploration and surface inspection. Autonomous
Robots ,42, 291–306.
Chen, K., Chai, & Yi, W. (2022). Multi-sensor control for jointly searching and
tracking multi-target using the Poisson multi-Bernoulli mixture. In 11th international
conference on control, automation and information sciences (pp. 240–247). Hanoi,
Vietnam.
Chen, J., & Dames, P. (2020). Collision-free distributed multi-target tracking using
teams of mobile robots with localization uncertainty. In IEEE/RSJ international
conference on intelligent robots and systems (pp. 6968–6974). Las Vegas, NV, USA.
Chen, J., & Dames, P. (2022). Active multi-target search using distributed Thompson
sampling :Technical report Research Square .
Chung, W., Giri, D. K., & Son, H. (2019). Finite-time control of multirotor UAVs under
disturbances. IEEE Access ,7, 173549–173558.
Cooper, J. (2020). Optimal multi-agent search and rescue using potential field theory.
InAIAA Scitech 2020 forum (pp. 1–9).
Dames, P. (2020). Distributed multi-target search and tracking using the PHD filter.
Autonomous Robots ,44, 673–689.
Dames, P., & Kumar, V. (2015). Autonomous localization of an unknown number of
targets without data association using teams of mobile sensors. IEEE Transaction on
Automation Science and Engineering ,12(2), 850–864.
Dames, P., Tokekar, P., & Kumar, V. (2017). Detecting, localizing, and tracking an
unknown number of moving targets using a team of mobile robots. The International
Journal of Robotics Research ,36, 1540–1553.
Dang, T., Khattak, S., Mascarich, F., & Alexis, K. (2019). Explore locally, plan globally:
A path planning framework for autonomous robotic exploration in subterranean
environments. In 19th international conference on advanced robotics (pp. 9–16). Belo
Horizonte, Brazil.
Gu, J., Sun, R., & Chen, J. (2021). Improved back-stepping control for nonlinear
small UAV systems with transient prescribed performance design. IEEE Access ,9,
128786–128798.
Gu, J., Zhou, J., & Chen, X. (2009). An enhancement of K-means clustering algorithm.
InInternational conference on business intelligence and financial engineering (pp.
237–240). Beijing, China.
Ivić, S. (2022). Motion control for autonomous Heterogeneous Multiagent Area search
in uncertain conditions. IEEE Transactions on Cybernetics ,52(5), 3123–3135.
Juliá, M., Gil, A., & Reinoso, O. (2012). A comparison of path planning strategies
for autonomous exploration and mapping of unknown environments. Autonomous
Robots ,33, 427–444.
Kagan, E., Goren, G., & Ben-Gal, I. (2010). Probabilistic double-distance algorithm of
search after static or moving target by autonomous mobile agent. In 2010 IEEE
26-th convention of electrical and electronics engineers (pp. 160–164). Eilat, Israel.
Khoukhi, A., & Shahab, M. (2013). Stabilized feedback control of unicycle mobile
robots. International Journal of Advanced Robotic Systems ,10(4), 1–8.
Kim, J. (2021). Tracking controllers to chase a target using multiple autonomous
underwater vehicles measuring the sound emitted from the target. IEEE Transactions
on Systems, Man, and Cybernetics: Systems ,51(7), 4579–4587.
Kim, J., Jang, D., & Kim, J. (2023). Distributed multi-agent target search and
tracking with Gaussian process and reinforcement learning. Intelligent Control and
Applications ,21, 3057–3067.
Leonard, M., & Zoubir, A. (2019). Multi-target tracking in distributed sensor networks
using particle PHD filters. IEEE Transactions on Signal Processing ,130–146 , 640–644.
Li, X., Ren, J., & Li, Y. (2024). Multi-mode filter target tracking method for mobile
robot using multi-agent reinforcement learning. Engineering Applications of Artificial
Intelligence ,127, 1–9.Lin, L., & Goodrich, M. (2014). Hierarchical heuristic search using a Gaussian mixture
model for UAV coverage planning. IEEE Transactions on Cybernetics ,44(12),
2432–2544.
Liu, L., Ji, H., Zhang, W., & Liao, G. (2020). Multi-sensor fusion for multi-target tracking
using measurement division. IET Radar Sonar Navigation ,14, 1451–1461.
Liu, L., Yao, J., Chen, J., Huang, J., Xu, H., Wang, B., et al. (2021). Global dynamic
path planning fusion algorithm combining jump-A* algorithm and dynamic window
approach. IEEE Access ,9, 19632–19638.
Mahler, R. (2007). Statistical multisource-multitarget information fusion . Artech.
Matzliach, B., Ben-Gal, I., & Kagan, E. (2022). Detection of static and mobile targets
by an autonomous agent with deep Q-learning abilities. Entropy ,24(8), 1–24.
Murillo, M., Sánchez, G., Genzelis, L., & Giovanini, L. (2018). A real-time path-planning
algorithm based on receding horizon techniques. Journal of Intelligent Robotics
System ,91, 445–457.
Olcay, E., Bodeit, J., & Lohmann, B. (2020). Sensor-based exploration of an unknown
area with multiple mobile agents. In 21st IFAC World Congress (pp. 2405–8963).
Berlin, Germany.
Otte, M., Kuhlman, M., & Sofge, D. (2018). Competitive target search with multi-agent
teams: symmetric and asymmetric communication constraints. Autonomous Robots ,
42(2), 1207–1230.
Pallin, M., Rashid, J., & Ögren, P. (2021). Formulation and solution of the multi-agent
concurrent search and rescue problem. In IEEE international symposium on safety,
security, and rescue robotics (pp. 27–33). New York, NY, USA.
Pandey, V., Kamal, S., & Ghosh, S. (2024). Finite-time discrete control for two-DOF
helicopter system. IEEE Transactions on Circuits and Systems II: Express Briefs ,71(8),
3800–3804.
Papaioannou, S., Kolios, P., Theocharides, T., Panayiotou, C. G., & Polycarpou, M.
M. (2021). A cooperative multiagent probabilistic framework for search and track
missions. IEEE Transactions on Control of Network Systems ,8(2), 847–857.
Rost, P. B., Axehill, D., & Hendeby, G. (2021). Sensor management for search and track
using the Poisson multi-Bernoulli mixture filter. IEEE Transactions on Aerospace and
Electronic Systems ,57(5), 2771–2783.
Shan, J., Yang, Y., Liu, H., & Liu, T. (2023). Infrared small target tracking based on
OSTrack model. IEEE Access ,11, 123938–123946.
Shen, G., Lei, L., Zhang, X., Li, Z., Cai, S., & Zhang, L. (2023). Multi-UAV cooper-
ative search based on reinforcement learning with a digital twin driven training
framework. IEEE Transactions on Vehicular Technology ,72(7), 8354–8368.
Shirsat, A., & Berman, S. (2021). Decentralized multi-target tracking with multiple
quadrotors using a PHD filter . Reston, Virginia: AIAA Scitech 2021 Forum.
Shoufeng, Y., Yingnan, P., Liang, C., & Lei, C. (2024). Predefined-time fault-tolerant
consensus tracking control for Multi-UAV systems with prescribed performance and
attitude constraints. IEEE Transactions on Aerospace and Electronic Systems ,60(4),
4058–4072.
Sun, P., Zhu, B., & Li, S. (2024). Vision-based prescribed performance control for
UAV target tracking subject to actuator saturation. IEEE Transactions on Intelligent
Vehicles ,9(1), 2382–2389.
Sung, Y., & Tokekar, P. (2022). GM-PHD filter for searching and tracking an unknown
number of targets with a mobile sensor with limited FOV. IEEE Transactions on
Automation Science and Engineering ,19(3), 2122–2134.
Sütő, B., Codrean, A., & Lendek, Zs. (2023). Optimal control of multiple drones for
obstacle avoidance. In 22nd IFAC World Congress (pp. 5980–5986). Yokohama,
Japan.
Tindall, L., Mair, E., & Nguyen, T. (2023). Radio frequency signal strength based
multi-target tracking with robust path planning. IEEE Access ,11, 43472–43484.
Trenev, I., Tkachenko, A., & Kustov, A. (2021). Movement stabilization of the Parrot
Mambo quadcopter along a given trajectory based on PID controllers. In 20th IFAC
conference on technology, culture, and international stability, (TECIS 21), IFAC-papers
online :54, (pp. 227–232). Russia, Moscow.
Tyagi, P., Kumar, Y., & Sujit, P. B. (2021). NMPC-based UAV 3D target tracking in
the presence of obstacles and visibility constraints. In International conference on
unmanned aircraft systems (pp. 858–867). Athens, Greece.
Vo, B. N., Singh, S., & Doucet, A. (2005). Sequential Monte Carlo methods for
multitarget filtering with random finite sets. IEEE Transactions on Aerospace and
Electronic Systems ,41(4), 1224–1245.
Wang, X., & Fang, X. (2023). A multi-agent reinforcement learning algorithm with the
action preference selection strategy for massive target cooperative search mission
planning. Expert Systems with Applications ,231, 1–20.
Wang, L., Su, F., Zhu, H., & Shen, L. (2010). Active sensing based cooperative target
tracking using UAVs in an urban area. In 2010 2nd International conference on
advanced computer control :2, (pp. 486–491). Shenyang, China.
Wang, G., Wei, F., Jiang, Y., Zhao, M., Wang, K., & Qi, H. (2022). A multi-
AUV maritime target search method for moving and invisible objects based on
multi-agent deep reinforcement learning. Sensors ,22(21), 1–18.
Xia, J., Luo, Y., Liu, Z., Zhang, Y., Shi, H., & Liu, Z. (2023). Cooperative multi-target
hunting by unmanned surface vehicles based on multi-agent reinforcement learning.
Defence Technology ,29, 80–94.
Xiao, J., Tan, X. M., Zhou, X., & Feroskhan, M. (2023). Learning collaborative multi-
target search for a visual drone swarm. In IEEE conference on Artificial Intelligence
(pp. 5–7). Santa Clara, CA, USA.
Xu, X., Yang, L., Meng, W., Cai, Q., & Fu, M. (2019). Multi-agent coverage search in
unknown environments with obstacles: A survey. In Chinese control conference (pp.
2317–2322). Guangzhou, China.Control  Engineering  Practice  153 (2024)  106094  
16 
B. Yousuf et al.
Yan, F., Di, K., Jiang, J., Jiang, Y., & Fan, H. (2019). Efficient decision-making for
multiagent target searching and occupancy in an unknown environment. Robotics
and Autonomous Systems ,114, 41–56.
Yousuf, B., Lendek, Zs., & Buşoniu, L. (2022). Exploration-based search for an unknown
number of targets using a UAV. In 6th IFAC conference on intelligent control and
automation sciences :55, (pp. 93–98). Cluj,Romania.
Yousuf, B., Lendek, Zs., & Buşoniu, L. (2023). Multi-agent exploration-based search for
an unknown number of targets. In 22nd IFAC World Congress (pp. 5999–6004).
Yokohama, Japan.
Yousuf, B., Lendek, Zs., & Buşoniu, L. (2024). Exploration-based planning for
multiple-target search with real-drone results. Sensors ,24(9), 1–20.
Zhang, R., Wang, J., Ge, J., & Huang, Q. (2024). Multiagent cooperative search learning
with intermittent communication. IEEE Intelligent Systems ,39(02), 11–20.
Zheng, X., Galland, S., Tu, X., Yang, Q., Lombard, A., & Gaud, N. (2020). Obstacle
avoidance model for UAVs with joint target based on multi-strategies and follow-
up vector field. In 11th international conference on ambient systems, networks and
technologies :170, (pp. 257–264). Warsaw, Poland.
Zhou, Y., Chen, A., He, X., & Bian, X. (2021). Multi-target coordinated search algorithm
for swarm robotics considering practical constraints. Frontiers in Neurorobotics ,15,
144–156.
Zhou, Y., Liu, Z., Shi, H., Li, S., Ning, N., Liu, F., et al. (2023). Cooperative multi-
agent target searching: a deep reinforcement learning approach based on parallel
hindsight experience replay. Complex and Intelligent Systems ,9, 4887–4898.
Zhou, L., Tzoumas, V., Pappas, G., & Tokekar, P. (2019). Resilient active target tracking
with multiple robots. IEEE Robotics and Automation Letters ,4(1), 129–136.
Bilal Yousuf was born in Karachi, Pakistan in 1993. He
received the Master’s degree in Electrical Engineering (Con-
trol Systems) from the Pakistan Navy Engineering College,
a part of the National University of Science and Technology
(PNEC-NUST) in 2018. Bilal’s passion for research and
engineering led him to pursue a PhD in robotics and control
systems. Bilal works as a full-time Research Assistant and
PhD student at the Technical University of Cluj-Napoca, Ro-
mania, within the Robotics and Nonlinear Control (ROCON)
group. His research interests primarily revolve around the
design of nonlinear control systems for robotic vehicles and
artificial intelligence.
Radu Herzal is an undergraduate student at the Technical
University of Cluj-Napoca, pursuing a BSc degree in Control
Engineering. Due to his passion for technology and research,
he joined the Robotics and Nonlinear Control (ROCON)
group as a student researcher. His research interests include
robotics, nonlinear control systems, and multiagent systems.
Zsofia Lendek received the MSc degree in control en-
gineering from the Technical University of Cluj-Napoca,
Romania, in 2003, and the PhD degree from the Delft
University of Technology, the Netherlands, in 2009. She is
currently a full professor at the Technical University of Cluj-
Napoca, Romania. Her research interests include observer
and controller design for nonlinear systems, in particular
Takagi–Sugeno fuzzy systems. She is an Associate Editor
for IEEE Transaction on Fuzzy systems and Engineering
Applications of Artificial Intelligence.
Lucian Busoniu received his Ph.D. degree cum laude from
the Delft University of Technology, the Netherlands, in
2009. He is a full professor with the Department of Au-
tomation at the Technical University of Cluj-Napoca, where
he leads the group on Robotics and Nonlinear Control. He
has previously held research positions in the Netherlands
and France. His research interests include nonlinear optimal
control using artificial intelligence and reinforcement learn-
ing techniques, robotics, and multiagent systems. He serves
on the editorial board of the Elsevier journal Engineering
Applications of Artificial Intelligence and was the recipient
of the 2009 Andrew P. Sage Award for the Best Paper in
the IEEE Transactions on Systems, Man, and Cybernetics.Control  Engineering  Practice  153 (2024)  106094  
17 