Multi-Agent Exploration-Based Search for
an Unknown Number of Targets⋆
Bilal Yousuf, Zs´ ofia Lendek, Lucian Bu¸ soniu
Technical University of Cluj-Napoca, Romania
e-mail: {bilal.yousuf, zsofia.lendek, lucian.busoniu }@aut.utcluj.ro
Abstract: This paper presents an active sensor fusion technique for multiple mobile agents
(robots) to detect an unknown number of static targets at unknown positions. To process and
fuse sensor measurements from the agents, we use a random finite set formulation with an
iterated-corrector probability hypothesis density filter. Our main contribution is to introduce two
different multi-agent planners to quickly find the targets. The planners make greedy decisions for
the next state of each agent by maximizing an objective function consisting of target refinement
and exploration components. We demonstrate the performance of our approach through a
series of simulations using homogeneous and heterogeneous agents. The results show that our
framework works better than a lawnmower baseline, and that a centralized version of the planner
works best.
Keywords: Multi-agent system, sensor fusion, active sensing, planning
1. INTRODUCTION
Multi-agent systems are becoming increasingly popular
in target search and tracking. Many researchers proposed
approaches for multiple agents to find an unknown number
of dynamic or static targets from uncertain measurements
(Chen and Dames, 2020b; Leonard and Zoubir, 2019;
Chen and Dames, 2020a; Ramachandran et al., 2021; Ma
et al., 2015; Zhou et al., 2019). Compared to a single-
agent scenario, multi-agent systems (Claudio et al., 2018)
improve detection by combining information from the
agents. For instance, Liu et al. (2020) defined a target-
search estimator that fuses measurements from several
agents using the iterated-corrector hypothesis density filter
(IC-PHD). Zhou et al. (2019) demonstrate resilient target
tracking against worst-case sensor failures in a receding-
horizon manner.
Most methods mentioned do not explicitly take environ-
ment exploration into account. In our earlier paper (Yousuf
et al., 2022), we already proposed an exploration-based
method for a single drone to explore a 2D environment in
search of an unknown number of static targets at unknown
positions.
The present paper extends the method of Yousuf et al.
(2022), by adding multiple agents to explore a 2D environ-
ment. We consider both homogeneous and heterogeneous
agents that explore the target space to find the unknown
number of static targets, see Fig. 1. Homogeneous agents
have identical capabilities (dynamics, sensors, etc), while
heterogeneous agents differ in their dynamics or sensors.
⋆This work was been financially supported from H2020 SeaClear, a
project that received funding from the European Union’s Horizon
2020 research and innovation programme under grant agreement
No 871295; and by the Romanian National Authority for Scientific
Research, CNCS-UEFISCDI, SeaClear support project number PN-
III-P3-3.6-H2020-2020-0060.
Fig. 1. Block diagram of our framework
The method for heterogeneous agents is motivated by
our ongoing SeaClear project. In SeaClear, two robots,
a remotely operated underwater vehicle (ROV) and an
unmanned aerial vehicle (UAV), share a map and aim to
find targets (litter) on the sea floor. Each robot is an agent.
The UAV searches the area from the air, highlighting the
regions with higher chances of containing targets, while
the ROV investigates the highlighted regions to more ac-
curately pinpoint the targets.
In our framework, each agent is equipped with a sensor
with a limited field of view (FOV), which is modeled
using a position-dependent probability of detection. For
those targets that are detected, the sensor provides noisy
measurements and an IC-PHD filter (Liu et al., 2020) that
runs in the framework of Random Finite Sets (RFS) (Ma
et al., 2015; Mahler, 2010; Chen et al., 2003; Vo et al.,
2014; Charrow et al., 2014) is used to fuse information
from all agents and to estimate the location of the targets.
The IC-PHD filter generates estimated target positions in
the form of an intensity function, a generalization of the
probability density that integrates to the expected number
of targets (Dames, 2020).
The key novelty of this paper consists of two multi-agent
planning algorithms that generate the path of the agents
by picking future discrete waypoints so as to maximize an
objective function. In both algorithms, the objective func-
tion maximized by the planner consists of two components:
target refinement and exploration. The target refinement
component aims to better find the locations of already
seen targets. The second, exploration component drives
the agents towards unseen regions of the space to find new
targets. The two different planner algorithms are: 1) inde-
pendent control, where the agents explore the environment
fully independently, and 2) centralized control, where the
actions of the agents are chosen jointly. In contrast to the
work of other researchers discussed above, this method —
like our previous one in (Yousuf et al., 2022) — includes
exploration.
We extensively test our framework in a series of simula-
tions. As a baseline, we consider systematically generated
lawnmower trajectories, as shown in Fig. 6. The proposed
algorithms work better than this baseline to detect a large
number of targets with either homogeneous or heteroge-
neous agents.
The remaining material is structured as follows, see also
Fig. 1. Section 2 defines the problem, followed by the
IC-PHD filtering framework in Section 3. In Section 4,
we present the two different planners. Section 5 presents
simulation results, and Section 6 concludes the paper.
2. PROBLEM FORMULATION
We consider naagents that explore a 2D space (environ-
ment) E, to search for an unknown number of static tar-
gets, see Fig. 2, in as few steps as possible. We implement
an RFS framework, as detailed in (Vo et al., 2005). The
current position of the agent in Cartesian coordinates is
denoted by qo
kat time step k, where o= 1,2, . . . , n ais the
index of the agent.
At each step, agents receive a set of measurements about
the targets, affected by noise. Agents are equipped with
sensors that are capable of detecting targets depending on
a FOV, as in Fig. 2. Note that the sensors of different
agents may have different parameters. The probability of
agent owith position qoof detecting a target at position
xis given by πo
d(x, qo) =Ge−∥ζo∥/2, where G≤1 is
a constant and ζo= (Xx−Xo
q
FX,Yx−Yo
q
FY) is the normalized
distance of the target from the agents. Here, ( Xx,Yx)
denotes the target’s position, ( Xo
q,Yo
q) defines the agent’s
position, and FXandFYare the width and length of the
sensor field of view. Whether the target xikis detected or
not by agent ois decided using a Bernoulli distribution,
bo
ik∼ß(πo
d(xik, qo
k)). Then, the set of measurements Zo
kis
defined as in (Gao et al., 2021):
Zo
k=

[
i∈{1,...,N k}s.t. bo
ik=1ho
k(x) +ϱo
k

(1)
where
ho
k= [do
ik, θo
ik]T
do
ik=q
(Xxik− Xoqk)2+ (Yxik− Yoqk)2
θo
ik=arctanYxik− Yo
qk
Xxik− Xoqk(2)
where ( Xxik,Yxik) is the position of target iin the space E,
anddo
ik, θo
ikare the distance and bearing of target irelative
Fig. 2. 2D target space with 12 targets and 2 agents.
The colors show the probability of observation of each
agent at their current position, orange to blue means
higher to lower probability.
to the agent’s position. Moreover, ϱo
ik∼ N (.,0, Ro) is
a Gaussian noise with mean 0= [0,0]⊤and covariance
Ro= diag[( σo)2,(σo)2].
The target measurement density go(zk|xk) can be writ-
ten as:
go(zo
k|xk) =N(zo
k, ho
k(x), Ro) (3)
i.e.,go(zo
k|xk) is a Gaussian density function, with covari-
ance Roand centered on ho
k(x) from (2). This density will
be used to estimate the target locations.
3. ESTIMATION FRAMEWORK
This section summarizes the Iterated-Corrector Probabil-
ity Hypothesis Density (IC-PHD) filtering framework. In
this framework, the objective is to estimate the location
of the targets by fusing measurements from all agents. All
computations are centralized. In Section 3.1, we discuss the
intensity function and the single-agent PHD filter predic-
tion and update operations, followed by IC-PHD update
operations in Section 3.2. The elimination of targets found
is defined in Section 3.3.
3.1 Single-agent PHD Filter
The Probability Hypothesis Density (PHD) D:E→
[0,∞), or intensity function, is similar to a probability
density function with the key difference that its integral
over the entire domain is not 1, but the number of
targets. The PHD filter performs Bayesian updates of an
intensity function based on the target measurements and
is summarized as:
Dk|k−1= Φ k|k−1(Dk−1|k−1)
Dk|k= Ψ k(Dk|k−1)(4)
Here, Dk|k−1is the prior intensity function predicted based
on intensity function Dk−1|k−1at time step k−1, and
Dk|kdenotes the posterior generated after processing the
measurements. The multi-target prior Dk|k−1at step kis
defined by:
Dk|k−1(xk) = Φ k|k−1(Dk−1|k−1)(xk) =
Υk(xk) +Z
Esps(ξ)δξ(xk)Dk−1|k−1(ξ)dξ(5)
where ps(ξ) is the probability that the target still exists.
In our specific problem, targets are stationary, so the
Fig. 3. Illustration of an intensity measure defined over 2D
space
transition density of a target xkis defined as a Dirac
delta δξ(xk), and Υ k(xk) denotes the intensity function
of a new target appearing in the FOV, chosen here as a
constant. The multi-target posterior Ψ k(Dk|k−1)(xk) can
be written as:
Dk|k(xk) = Ψ k(Dk|k−1)(xk) ="
1−πdk(xk) +X
z∈Zkψkz(xk)
ψkz, Dk|k−1
(xk)#
·Dk|k−1(xk)
(6)
where ψkz(xk) =πo
d(xk, qo
k)go(zo
k|xk) denotes the overall
probability density of detecting a target at xkwith g
defined in (3). In practice, we employ the SMC-PHD filter
(Vo et al., 2005), which uses a set of weighted particles
to represent the intensity function. An example of an
intensity function is given in Fig. 2, where the yellow
color shows the peaks of the intensity function, and the
circles represent the weighted particles. For example, the
red patch in Fig. 2 is Dover region S, and Sis the
corresponding rectangle lying in the ( x1, x2) plane. The
integral of the intensity function over the red region gives
the expected number of targets in S.
3.2 Sequential IC-PHD Filter
Let us next consider a set of agents na, receiving noisy
measurements per our proposed sensor model. Each agent
oreceives a measurement set Zo
kdepending on the proba-
bility of detection πo
d(x, qo), and computes likelihood func-
tiongo(zo
k|xk) based on those measurements. At time k,
the IC-PHD filter (Liu et al., 2020) generates a posterior
intensity function Do
k|kof each sensor oin turn. In this
filter, the prediction step is similar to that in (5). The
prior is then taken to be the initial multi-agent posterior
D0
k|k, with index 0:
Dk|k−1= Φ k|k−1(Dk−1|k−1)(x) =:D0
k|k (7)
Then, the measurement sets of the agents will be processed
sequentially, in the posterior updates:
Do
k|k(x) = Ψo
k(Do−1
k|k)(x), o= 1, . . . , n a
Dk|k(x) :=Dna
k|k(x)(8)
Each IC-PHD posterior update equation is defined as:Do
k|k=
1−πo
dk(xk) +X
zo
k∈Zo
kψo
kz(xk)
ψo
kz, Dk|k−1
(xk)
·Do−1
k|k
(9)
foro= 1,2, . . . , n a. The particle-based approximation
from Section 3.1 is used. Note that for the special case of a
single-sensor problem, the IC-PHD reduces to the original
PHD filter.
3.3 Marking and Removal of Found Targets
The algorithm maintains two sets of targets (i) found
targets and (ii) potential targets. At each step k, we
extract the potential targets as clusters of particles with
K-means. Then, two conditions are checked: (1) the width
Wiof each cluster of particles should be below threshold
TW, and (2) the sum of the weights ωjof the particles
in the cluster should be above threshold Tm. If these two
conditions are satisfied, i.e., the cluster is very narrow and
contains a high concentration of particles, we shift the
corresponding target from potential to found .
To allow the drone to focus on refining poorly seen
targets and finding new targets, we remove the particles
corresponding to found targets, and to avoid reidentifying
the found targets, we disregard future measurements likely
to come from them, see (Yousuf et al., 2022) for details.
4. MULTI-AGENT PLANNER
Consider now the problem of designing a path for the
agents to explore the 2D target space to quickly find the
targets. Next states are picked by maximizing an objective
function. The set of possible candidate next states of all
agents is Qk=Q1
k×Q2
k×. . .×Qna
k, where Qo
kis the set of
candidate next states for agent o.Qkis discrete and should
be sufficiently rich for the agents to search for unknown
targets, see e.g. Fig 4. We define two different cases: (i)
independent planning, where each agent ooptimizes in its
own set Qo
k, and (ii) centralized planning, where agents
optimize together in the joint set of candidates Qk.
Independent planner. This planner works by making
independent control decisions q∗o
k+1for each agent. It is a
direct application for each agent of the method in (Yousuf
et al., 2022), where we used a single agent. Each agent
runs their own PHD filter, like in equation (4), and takes
decisions with:
q∗o
k+1= argmaxqo
k+1∈Qo
k
To
k(qo
k+1) +α·Eo(qo
k+1)	
(10)
The objective function has two components: target re-
finement To
k(qo
k+1), aiming to better find the locations
of the targets that were already seen; and exploration
Eo(qo
k+1), driving the agents to explore unseen regions.
The tunable parameter αcontrols the tradeoff between
the two components. The target refinement component is
computed as the sum of the observation probabilities of
particle cluster centers:
To
k=CoX
j=1πo
d(Co
j, qo
k+1) (11)
and is different from the target refinement component of
(Yousuf et al., 2022). In (11), Codenotes the cluster count,
andCo
jis the center of the jth cluster. The center Co
jhas
the meaning of an estimated target position. The intuition
is that the probability of seeing estimated target locations
is maximized.
An exploration function ι(x) is defined to compute
Eo(qo
k+1), initially set to 1 for the whole target space.
At each step k,ιshould decrease for each xwith an
amount equal to the probability of detection πo
d(x, qo
k). The
meaning is that position xhas been explored to an amount
equal to the probability of detection at that position. In
practice, ιis implemented by interpolation on a 2D grid
xij. Each grid point is initialized with:
ιo
0(xij) = 1 ,∀i, j
then decreased with the rule:
ιo
k(xij) =ιo
k−1(xij)·(1−πo
d(xij, qo
k)),∀i, j (12)
Then, the exploration component of (10) is defined as:
Eo(qo
k+1) =ιo
k(qo
k+1) (13)
where ιo
kis computed at qo
k+1using interpolation on the
grid. It is important to observe that when no target has
been detected (or all targets were marked as found, see
Section 3.3), the agent’s trajectory will be computed only
based on the exploration component, and will fill the space
with a lawnmower-like trajectory.
As mentioned earlier, each agent runs its own PHD filter
(Section 3.1) to generate the particle clusters (estimated
target positions) and applies the target removal method to
found targets (Section 3.3). The center Co
jof such a cluster
is added to a set ˆXof found targets that are common to all
the agents. Agents therefore explicitly communicate with
each other about target positions that have been found,
and each agent will ignore measurements coming from any
target in ˆX. Removal is done like in the last forloop of
Algorithm 1.
Centralized planner. The centralized planner works by
making a centralized control decision q∗
k+1= 
q1∗
k+1, q2∗
k+1, . . . , qna∗
k+1T
for all agents at once, ,with the following rule:
q∗
k+1= argmaxqk+1∈Qk
Tk(qk+1) +α·E(qk+1)	
(14)
In contrast to the independent planner, in this case, there
is no separate set of weighted particle intensity function
estimates for each agent. There is only one set of weighted
particles generated using the IC-PHD filter based on the
measurements of all the agents, as in Section 3.3. We
extract clusters from this single set of particles, which
are used to compute the target refinement component
Tk(qk+1) as follows.
Tk(qk+1) =T1(q1
k+1) +T2
k(q2
k+1). . .+Tna
k(qna
k+1)
where To
k(qo
k+1), with index o= 1,2, . . . , n a:
To
k=CX
i=1πo
d(Cj, qo
k+1) (15)
Here, Cjis defined as the center of cluster jin the set of
particles, and Cis the number of such clusters.
The exploration component E(qk+1) is formulated as the
product of the exploration components of each agent:E(qk+1) =naY
o=1ιo
k(qo
k+1) (16)
Each exploration component is defined in the same way
as for the independent planner. The intuition is that
centralized exploration should cover more area compared
to independent exploration, as agents are driven to explore
different regions at each time step k.
After a target is marked as found, the center of the corre-
sponding cluster is added to a set ˆXof found targets. Simi-
larly to the independent planner, after the target has been
added, all particles related to it are deleted, and future
measurements from that target are ignored. Algorithm 1
summarizes the centralized planner procedure.
Algorithm 1: Centralized control procedure at k
Generate set Qkof candidate next states for all agents
Compute exploration component Eusing (16)
foreachqk+1∈Qkdo
compute target refinement Tkand exploration E
Find best next joint state q∗
k+1using (14)
Execute K-means to find clusters Cj, j= 1, . . . ,C
foreach cluster j= 1, . . . ,Cdo
ifWi≤ TWandP
j∈Cωj≥ Tmthen
/* target found */
delete all particles i∈ Cj
ˆX←ˆX∪ˆxi
Get measurements Zo
kfrom sensors of each agent o
For each agent o
forHo
k(x)∈Zo
kdo
forˆx∈ˆXdo
Zo
aux={zo
k∈Zo
k| ∥h−1(zo
k)−ˆx∥ ≤ T z}
ifZo
auxis nonempty then
/* remove measurement */
Zo
k=Zo
k\argminzo
k∈Zoaux∥h−1(zo
k)−ˆx∥
run filter from Section 3.2 with measurements Zo
k
5. RESULTS
In this section, we present simulation results to validate the
above framework. Section 5.1 presents results using homo-
geneous agents, followed by heterogeneous agents in Sec-
tion 5.2. We compare how well the proposed algorithm per-
forms versus a multi-agent lawnmower trajectory. These
results also showcase the potential of our framework using
heterogeneous agents e.g. for the SeaClear project. All
simulations have been done using MATLAB.
5.1 Homogeneous-Agent Results
In these experiments, we consider 2 agents, and 12 tar-
gets distributed uniformly in the 2D environment E=
[−30,300]m ×[−30,300]m. The candidate position set of
each agent has 8 different position choices: right, left, top,
bottom, and the diagonals, as shown in Fig. 4 (left). 10
different runs are made. As a baseline, we use a lawn-
mower. The trajectory length is chosen as 120 steps for all
experiments because the lawnmower needs this length to
complete the search: at 120 steps, the agents’ trajectories
Fig. 4. Candidate next positions for one agent, where
the current position is in the middle. Left: candidate
set for homogeneous agents. Right: candidate set for
heterogeneous agents
Fig. 5. Average number of targets detected across 10 maps
with the 95% confidence intervals.
Fig. 6. Multi-agent trajectories with a lawnmower.
(a) Independent planner
 (b) Centralized planner
Fig. 7. Examples of trajectories using the two new planners
meet in the middle, and they find all the targets. The
threshold values in Algorithm 1 are experimentally set as
TW= 1.2m,Tm= 2.5m, and Tz= 5m. The parameters
of the probability of detection πo
d(x, qo) are: G= 0.98,
FX=FY= 25. The field of view is the same for all
experiments for fairness. The distance from the current
position at kto the future position at k+ 1 is set to 8
meters at each step. The starting position of the agents is
set as [0,0], and it is the same in all runs.
Fig. 8. SeaClear system concept
Fig. 5 shows the number of target detections over time,
averaged in all the 10 experiments, along with their 95%
confidence interval. The proposed algorithms find the
target faster than the lawnmower. The centralized planner
finds the targets faster than the independent planner
because agents find targets at different locations. In Fig. 6
we show the lawnmower trajectories, where the agents
start in opposite corners and meet in the middle. It is
visible that the multi-agent lawnmower has covered the
whole target space. Fig. 7 shows the agents’ trajectories
with the novel planners in one of the 10 experiments. The
agents do not cover the whole environment uniformly but
focus on relevant regions to find targets faster compared to
the lawnmower. In Fig. 7a, for the independent planner, we
see that since the agents take independent decisions, they
sometimes focus on the same targets. In Fig. 7b, when the
centralized planner is used to explore the target space, the
agents focus on different targets.
5.2 Heterogeneous-Agent Results
To illustrate the performance of the proposed target lo-
calization algorithm in a more realistic scenario, we link
our research problem to the ongoing project SeaClear
https://seaclear-project.eu/ . In SeaClear, we have
two different robots: an unmanned aerial vehicle (UAV),
and a remotely controlled underwater vehicle (ROV), both
in search of litter on the sea floor, as shown in Fig. 8. The
UAV is faster and has a larger sensor FOV. The ROV has
better sensor accuracy but a lower speed and a smaller
FOV. In the literature, to distinguish between target and
sea life, Deep learning methods are used. Here we use the
simulation with the simple sensor model of Section 2. We
took agent 1 as the UAV and agent 2 as the ROV, to
see how our algorithm handles these different types of
agents. In this simulation, we used only the centralized
planner, and the candidate set has 4 different position
choices: right, left, top, and bottom, as shown in Fig. 4
(right). The initial states of both agents are set as [0; 0], in
the 2D environment E= [−30,300]m ×[−30,300]m. The
threshold values in Algorithm 1 are set as TW= 1.2m,
Tm= 2.4m, and Tz= 5m. The parameters of the proba-
bility of detection for the first agent are G= 0.98, and the
sensor FOV is set as FX=FY= 60, and the distance from
the current position at kto the future position at k+ 1 is
set to 12m. For the 2nd agent, G= 0.98, the sensor field
of view is set as FX=FY= 15, and the distance from the
current position of agent 2 at step kto the future position
atk+1 is set to 4 m. The computation time is around 1 .88s
and 3 .02s per time step for agents 1 and 2, respectively.
50 100 150 200 250 300
Steps024681012# of Targets
Centralized with Heterogeneous agentFig. 9. Top: Heterogeneous agent trajectories using the
centralized planner, along with the estimated target
position. Bottom: Number of targets found over time.
In this simulation, we consider 12 targets uniformly dis-
tributed at random locations. The trajectory length is cho-
sen as 320 steps since the slower agent takes more steps to
find the targets. Fig. 9 (top) shows the agents’ trajectories.
It is visible that the first agent roughly solves a coverage
problem: it explores the whole environment with a large
FOV. The sensor of agent 1 is unable to detect the target
well, so agent 1 only highlights those areas that have higher
chances of containing targets. The second agent, having
a smaller FOV and better accuracy, focuses on relevant
regions highlighted by the faster agent, and finds all the
targets. Fig. 9 (top) also shows the estimated target posi-
tions in green color. Fig. 9 (bottom) shows the number of
target detections over time. The RMSE of the localization
is 1.14 m. For a better understanding of this experiment,
please refer to the full video of the heterogeneous agents’
trajectories, available online at http://rocon.utcluj.
ro/files/multiagent_targetsearch.mp4 .
6. CONCLUSION
In this paper, we introduced a novel strategy that enables
multiple agents to search for an unknown number of static
targets in a 2D environment. These agents are equipped
with imperfect sensors, which are noisy and may fail
to detect targets within the field of view. To estimate
the number and location of the targets, the iterated-
corrector Probability Hypothesis Density (IC-PHD) filter
is used. We proposed two novel planners with target
refinement and exploration components, and validate the
performance of our framework through simulations. Future
work includes the deployment of the framework on the real
robots of the SeaClear project, where challenges include
identifying the sensor model and hardware integration.
REFERENCES
Charrow, B., Michael, N., and Kumar, V.R. (2014). Active control
strategies for discovering and localizing devices with range-only
sensors. Algorithmic Foundations of Robotics , 107, 51–71.Chen, J. and Dames, P. (2020a). Collision-free distributed multi-
target tracking using teams of mobile robots with localization un-
certainty. In IEEE/RSJ International Conference on Intelligent
Robots and Systems (IROS) , 6968–6974. Las Vegas, NV, USA.
Chen, J. and Dames, P. (2020b). Distributed multi-target search and
tracking using a coordinated team of ground and aerial robots.
Robotics science and systems , 47, 971–977.
Chen, J., Xie, Z., and Dames, P. (2003). The semantic PHD filter
for multi-class target tracking: From theory to practice. Robotics
and Autonomous Systems , 149, 1–14.
Claudio, F., Ngu, V.B., Tuong, V.B., Giorgio, B., and Luigi, C.
(2018). Robust fusion for multisensor multiobject tracking. IEEE
Signal Processing Letters , 25(5), 640–644.
Dames, P. (2020). Distributed multi-target search and tracking using
the PHD filter. Autonomous robots , 44, 673–689.
Gao, L., Battistelli, G., Chisci, L., and Farina, A. (2021). Fusion-
based multidetection multitarget tracking with random finite sets.
IEEE Transactions on Aerospace and Electronic Systems , 57(4),
2438–2458.
Leonard, M.R. and Zoubir, A.M. (2019). Multi-target tracking in
distributed sensor networks using particle PHD filters. IEEE
Transactions on Signal Processing , 159, 130–146.
Liu, L., Ji, H., Zhang, W., and Liao, G. (2020). Multi-sensor fusion
for multi-target tracking using measurement division. IET Radar
Sonar Navigation , 14, 1451–1461.
Ma, L., Xue, K., and Wang, P. (2015). Distributed multiagent control
approach for multitarget tracking. Mathematical Problems in
Engineering , 2015, 1–10.
Mahler, R. (2010). Multitarget Bayes filtering via first-order multi-
target moments. IEEE Transactions on Aerospace and Electronic
Systems , 39(4), 1152–1178.
Ramachandran, Kumar, R., Fronda, Nicole, Sukhatme, and S, G.
(2021). Resilience in multirobot multitarget tracking with un-
known number of targets through reconfiguration. IEEE Trans-
actions on Control of Network Systems , 8(2), 609–620.
Vo, B.N., S.Singh, and Doucet, A. (2005). Sequential Monte Carlo
methods for multitarget filtering with random finite sets. IEEE
Transactions on Aerospace and Electronic Systems , 41(4), 1224–
1245.
Vo, B.N., Vo, B.T., and Phung, D. (2014). Labeled random finite
sets and the Bayes multi-target tracking filter. IEEE Transactions
on Signal Processing , 6(24), 6554–6567.
Yousuf, B., Lendek, Zs., and Bu¸ soniu, L. (2022). Exploration-
based search for an unknown number of targets using a UAV.
InProceedings of 6th IFAC Conference on Intelligent Control
and Automation Sciences,(ICONS 22), IFAC-Papers Online , vol-
ume 55, 93–98. Cluj, Romania.
Zhou, L., Tzoumas, V., Pappas, G.J., and Tokekar, P. (2019).
Resilient active target tracking with multiple robots. IEEE
Robotics and Automation Letters , 4(1), 129–136.