Trajectory Optimization in Single and Dual-UA V Bearing-Only Target Localization
Zhijian Xiaoa,b, Huayu Huanga,b, Bin Lia,b,1, Yang Shanga,b,1, Banglei Guana,b
aCollege of Aerospace Science and Engineering, National University of Defense Technology, Changsha 410073, China
bHunan Key Laboratory of Image Measurement and Visual Navigation, Changsha 410073, China
Abstract
Bearing-only target localization is a fundamental problem in optical measurement and finds extensive applications in unmanned
aerial vehicle (UA V) technology. Effective trajectory planning establishes favorable observation geometries, thereby enhancing the
target localization accuracy of bearing-only UA V systems. This paper proposes an trajectory optimization method for unmanned
aerial vehicles (UA Vs) in bearing-only target localization scenarios. By leveraging the Fisher Information Matrix (FIM), the
proposed approach dynamically integrates the geometric configuration and vehicle maneuverability into the optimization framework.
Specifically, we introduce a spectrally-weighted FIM objective function that provides better gradient dynamics near degenerate
configurations, enabling the planner to rapidly escape from poor observation conditions. For dual-UA V scenarios, an intersection
angle sine term is introduced to optimize triangulation geometry by improving the sight-line intersection angle, thereby preventing
trajectory aggregation. Furthermore, we propose an improved Particle Swarm Optimization (PSO) algorithm with motion model
constraints and particle normalization to ensure the physical feasibility of the trajectory and enhance the compatibility with the
objective functions. Simulation results demonstrate that the proposed method reduces the median localization error by 99.21%
compared to conventional FIM-based approaches in single-UA V scenarios, and achieves a 69.70% improvement for dual-UA V
configurations, exhibits superior performance in long-duration bearing-only target localization of maneuverability targets at extended
ranges.
Keywords:Fisher Information Matrix, Trajectory Optimization, Bearing-Only Target Localization, Particle Swarm Optimization
1. Introduction
Unmanned Aerial Vehicles (UA Vs) have widely become in-
dispensable tools in civilian and military applications, including
infrastructure inspection, precision agriculture, search and res-
cue operations, and surveillance missions [ 1,2]. The ability
of UA Vs to access areas that are difficult to reach and operate
in hazardous environments has driven their rapid adoption in
recent years. Central to the effectiveness of these applications
is the capability to accurately localize and track targets of in-
terest in real-time, which forms the foundation for autonomous
decision-making and mission execution [3, 4].
Target localization techniques for UA Vs can be categorized
based on the type of measurements employed. While range-
based methods using GPS, LiDAR, or ultrasonic sensors pro-
vide direct distance information, bearing-only localization using
monocular cameras has gained significant attention due to its low
cost, light weight, and minimal payload requirements [ 5,6,7].
In most cases, the direction of the targets relative to the UA V is
measured through visual sensors, and the position of the targets
is estimated through geometric triangulation over time [8].
The development of bearing-only localization has been driven
by advances in both theoretical understanding and practical al-
gorithms. Early work established the fundamental observability
∗Corresponding author.
E-mail address:libin19a@nudt.edu.cn; shangyang1977@nudt.edu.cn.conditions for bearing-only tracking, demonstrating that the ob-
server must execute specific maneuvers to guarantee that the
target state is recoverable from angle measurements alone [ 9,10].
Subsequent research introduced the Fisher Information Matrix
(FIM) and Cramér-Rao Lower Bound (CRLB) as theoretical
tools for quantifying localization accuracy and optimizing sensor
placement [ 11,12]. These frameworks revealed that localization
performance is critically dependent on the relative geometry
between observers and targets that means poor viewing angles
can lead to unbounded estimation uncertainty even with high-
precision sensors [13, 14].
Recent advances have significantly expanded the capabilities
of bearing-only localization systems. Li et al. [15] proposed an
observability-enhanced helical guidance law that drives UA Vs
along three-dimensional spiral trajectories, exploiting the ad-
ditional degree of freedom in altitude to improve observabil-
ity. Peng et al. [ 16] developed trajectory optimization methods
using control barrier functions to actively enhance observabil-
ity while accounting for sensor bias calibration. Meanwhile,
learning-based approaches have emerged as promising alterna-
tives: Fu et al. [ 17] introduced Gaussian process learning for
bearing-only target tracking, providing probabilistic bounds on
prediction errors. Su et al. [ 18] developed a real-time remote
sensing framework for uneven terrain using monocular bearing-
only micro UA Vs, achieving 3.79 m RMSE in field experiments.
These developments collectively demonstrate the rich potential
of bearing-only methods for practical UA V applications.arXiv:2606.09188v1  [cs.RO]  8 Jun 2026
Despite these advances, a fundamental limitation persists:
most existing approaches treat the UA V as a passive observer,
neglecting its inherent mobility as a controllable degree of free-
dom for improving localization performance. This observation
motivates the paradigm of active perception, where the sensing
platform dynamically adjusts its motion to maximize informa-
tion acquisition [ 19]. In contrast to passive data collection with
pre-defined trajectories, active perception tightly couples sens-
ing and decision-making, enabling the platform to respond to
real-time observations and optimize the quality of gathered in-
formation by controlling the motion of the platform [20, 21].
The benefits of active perception for bearing-only localization
are substantial. By intelligently planning trajectories that maxi-
mize observability, UA Vs can achieve significantly higher local-
ization accuracy with fewer measurements compared to passive
approaches [ 22,23]. Popovi ´c et al. [ 24] demonstrated that infor-
mative path planning using the Covariance Matrix Adaptation
Evolution Strategy (CMA-ES) can reduce map entropy by 45%
compared to coverage-based planners. Rúckin et al. [ 25] showed
that deep reinforcement learning for adaptive informative path
planning achieves 8–10 ×speedup over evolutionary methods
while maintaining superior information gathering performance.
Recent work by Mudrik et al. [ 26] further demonstrated that
coordinated teams of fixed-field-of-view UA Vs can match or
surpass the localization accuracy of single gimballed systems
while substantially lowering system complexity and cost. These
results highlight the transformative potential of leveraging UA V
mobility for active observation.
However, existing active perception approaches for bearing-
only localization face several challenges. First, the conven-
tional FIM-based optimization typically maximizes the determi-
nant [ 27]. The D-optimality gradient vanishes near degenerate
geometries, causing the optimizer to become trapped in singu-
lar configurations. Second, multi-UA V coordination strategies
often assume static geometric configurations or decouple trajec-
tory planning from target dynamics [ 28]. Third, conventional
trajectory optimization methods use the direction angle as the
optimization vector, resulting in the generation of unreasonable
waypoints. [ 29,30]. Recent advances in self-supervised learning
for trajectory planning [ 31] and particle filter-guided neural net-
works for multi-target tracking [ 32] offer promising directions.
However, their methods have not been fully integrated into the
frameworks of active perception.
To address these limitations, this paper presents an trajectory
optimization framework for UA V bearing-only target localiza-
tion as shown in Fig. 1. Our main contributions are threefold:
•We propose a spectrally-weighted FIM objective function
that reshapes the optimization landscape near degenerate
configurations. By logarithmically aggregating FIM eigen-
values, the objective function generates diverging gradients
that enables the optimizer to escape local optima more
easily, thereby generating optimal trajectories.
•We extend this formulation by introducing an intersection
angle sine objective function for dual-UA V scenarios that
optimizes triangulation geometry by optimizing the sight-line intersection angle, thereby preventing trajectory aggre-
gation and enhancing cross-bearing information diversity.
•We develop a motion-constrained PSO algorithm with parti-
cle normalization that embeds platform motion constraints
into the particle generation iteration process and uses par-
ticle diversity features to automatically adjust the weights
of sub-functions. This ensures the physical feasibility of
the trajectory without manual tuning of objective weights,
enhancing compatibility with the objective functions.
The remainder of this paper is organized as follows. Section 2
reviews related work on active perception and informative path
planning for UA V-based localization. Section 3 presents the
theoretical foundation of our approach, including the spectrally-
weighted FIM formulation, the intersection angle sine objec-
tive for dual-UA V coordination, and our optimization algorithm
framework. Section 4 presents simulation results validating the
effectiveness of the proposed method. Section 5 discusses the
obtained results, analyzes the strong and weak points of our
method, and outlines future research directions. Section 6 makes
a conclusion for this paper.
2. Related Work
Active perception refers to the paradigm where a sensing
platform dynamically adjusts its state or motion to maximize
the information content of acquired measurements [ 19]. Unlike
passive perception where sensor configuration is fixed or fol-
lows pre-defined patterns, active perception treats sensing and
decision-making as coupled processes that mutually inform each
other. This concept has its roots in active vision research, where
camera parameters such as gaze direction, focus, and aperture
are controlled to facilitate visual tasks [ 20,21]. In the context of
UA V-based localization, active perception manifests as trajectory
optimization that maximizes information-theoretic objectives
while respecting platform dynamics and mission constraints.
The effectiveness of active perception stems from its ability
to exploit the fundamental relationship between sensor geome-
try and estimation uncertainty. For bearing-only measurements,
the Fisher Information Matrix provides a theoretical charac-
terization of how observer-target geometry affects localization
accuracy [ 11,12]. By optimizing trajectories to maximize in-
formation content, active perception methods can achieve the
same estimation accuracy with significantly fewer measurements
compared to passive approaches [ 22,23]. This efficiency is par-
ticularly valuable for UA V operations where battery life and
mission duration are constrained.
Early work in active perception for target localization focused
on establishing observability conditions and developing guid-
ance laws that enhance estimation performance. Nardone and
Aidala [ 9] derived fundamental observability criteria for bearing-
only tracking, demonstrating that observer acceleration must
satisfy specific conditions to guarantee target state recoverabil-
ity. Aidala et al. [ 10] introduced the Fisher Information Matrix
for quantifying observability in bearing-only systems, establish-
ing optimal sensor-target geometries that maximize information
2
Figure 1: The flow diagram of the proposed method.
content. These theoretical foundations laid the groundwork for
subsequent trajectory optimization approaches.
The framework of Informative Path Planning (IPP) formalizes
active perception as an optimization problem where trajecto-
ries are selected to maximize information-theoretic objectives
subject to platform constraints [ 24,25]. Within this framework,
existing approaches can be broadly classified into two categories:
sampling-based and optimization-based methods. Sampling-
based algorithms, such as those proposed by Hollinger et al. [ 22],
balance exploration and exploitation in unknown environments.
Choudhury et al. [ 23] combined Monte Carlo Tree Search with
cost-benefit rollouts to improve sampling efficiency in large
action spaces. These methods demonstrated that adaptive re-
planning based on accumulated information significantly out-
performs pre-computed coverage patterns. Optimization-based
approaches directly maximize information objectives through
continuous trajectory refinement. Popovi ´c et al. [ 24] employed
the Covariance Matrix Adaptation Evolution Strategy (CMA-
ES) to optimize measurement positions for UA V-based active
classification, achieving substantial reductions in map entropy
compared to coverage planners. Hitz et al. [ 33] extended this
approach to persistent monitoring applications, demonstrating
continuous refinement of informative trajectories over extended
mission durations.
Recent years have witnessed growing interest in learning-
based methods for active perception. Rúckin et al. [ 25] pro-
posed deep reinforcement learning for adaptive informative path
planning, training a convolutional neural network to predict
informative actions from environmental observations. Their
approach achieved 8–10 ×speedup over CMA-ES while main-
taining superior uncertainty reduction performance. Vashisth et
al. [34] extended this framework with dynamic graph networks
for multi-UA V coordination, enabling scalable adaptive planningthrough learned communication protocols. Jiang et al. [ 31] in-
troduced a self-supervised learning approach with differentiable
optimization for UA V trajectory planning, achieving 31.33%
improvement in position tracking error and 49.37% reduction
in control effort. These learning-based methods offer promising
computational efficiency but require extensive offline training
and may struggle with generalization to unseen environments.
Several approaches specifically address the challenges of
bearing-only localization through active perception. He et
al. [8] developed trajectory optimization methods that maxi-
mize bearing-based observability metrics, revealing that circu-
lar motion around the target provides optimal observability for
stationary targets. Li et al. [ 15] extended this analysis to three-
dimensional scenarios, proposing helical guidance laws that
exploit altitude variation to enhance observability. Recent work
by Zhou et al. [ 35] proposed distributed fixed-time estimators for
multi-UA V bearing-only target tracking, enabling complete state
estimation within preset time bounds. These methods demon-
strate the importance of tailoring active perception strategies to
the specific characteristics of bearing measurements.
Multi-UA V active perception introduces additional challenges
related to coordination and information fusion. Doostmoham-
madian et al. [ 28] developed distributed estimation approaches
for tracking mobile targets via UA V formations, incorporating
observability analysis into the control design. Dai et al. [ 36]
addressed asynchronous multi-target tracking through collabora-
tive trajectory optimization, demonstrating the benefits of tem-
poral coordination in multi-platform scenarios. Wang et al. [ 37]
proposed energy-efficient cooperative localization by measure-
ment scheduling, demonstrating that optimized fusion strate-
gies can significantly reduce communication costs in large-scale
swarms. However, these formation-based and scheduling-centric
approaches typically decouple geometric configuration optimiza-
3
tion from trajectory planning, limiting their effectiveness when
tracking maneuvering targets. The challenge of dynamically
optimizing geometric configuration while accounting for target
motion and platform constraints remains an open problem.
In contrast to existing approaches, this work addresses the
limitations of current active perception methods for bearing-only
localization through three key innovations. First, our spectrally-
weighted FIM formulation explicitly promotes robust gradi-
ent dynamics near degenerate configurations, overcoming the
vanishing-gradient issue of conventional D-optimality criteria.
Second, the intersection angle sine objective function integrates
geometric configuration planning with trajectory optimization
in a unified framework. Third, the motion-constrained PSO with
particle normalization ensures the physical feasibility of the tra-
jectory, and enhances compatibility with the objective functions.
These contributions collectively advance the state-of-the-art in
active perception for UA V-based bearing-only localization.
3. Methods
In this section, we establish the objective functions for UA V
trajectory planning and propose a new algorithmic framework
based on PSO algorithm. Section 3.1 introduces the conven-
tional FIM objective function based on the D-optimality crite-
rion and derives its functional expression. Section 3.2 presents
the spectrally-weighted FIM objective function and analyzes its
gradient dynamics near degenerate configurations. Section 3.3
introduces the intersection angle objective for dual-UA V coor-
dination and establishes its equivalence with the GDOP. Sec-
tion 3.4 presents the optimization algorithm framework for the
UA V trajectory planning problem.
3.1. Fundamentals of Fisher Information Matrix
The FIM is a fundamental concept in statistics and information
theory, quantifying the sensitivity of probability distributions to
parameter variations and serving as a core tool for measuring
parameter estimation uncertainty. For a parameterized probabil-
ity distribution p(z|θ), where zrepresents the state vector and
θrepresents the parameter vector, the FIM is defined based on
second-order derivatives of the log-likelihood function. The
general expectation-based definition is
[J]i j=E"∂ln(p(z|θ))
∂θi·∂ln(p(z|θ))
∂θj#
,(1)
where [J] i jdenotes the element in the i-th row and j-th column
of the FIM, and∂lnp
∂θirepresents the partial derivative of the
log-likelihood function with respect to thei-th parameter.
Diagonal elements of FIM represent the information content
for corresponding parameters. Generally, larger diagonal ele-
ments indicate stronger sensitivity of the probability distribution
to parameter variations, signifying greater parameter importance.
According to Cramér-Rao Lower Bound (CRLB) theory, for
an unbiased estimator ˆθ, the covariance matrix satisfies
cov(ˆθ)≥J−1.(2)Eq.(2)establishes that the inverse of the FIM constitutes the
lower bound for the parameter estimation error covariance ma-
trix. When the observation angle is treated as the observation
parameter θ, the target position as the state vector z, and the tri-
angulation equation as the probability distribution functionp(·)
in Eq. 1, the inverse of FIM represents the lower bound of the
achievable measurement accuracy. Consequently, researchers
often use FIM to assess the impact of observations on estimates.
To derive FIM for UA V observations, we simplify the motion
of target over a short time interval to uniform acceleration. The
state equation for the target is expressed as:
u(k+1)=Φu(k)+w,(3)
u(k)=x(k),y(k),z(k),˙x(k),˙y(k),˙z(k),¨x(k),¨y(k),¨z(k)T,(4)
Φ=I3tI3t2
2I3
0 I 3tI3
0 0 I 3,(5)
where Φdenotes the state transition matrix, u(k) denotes the
state vector of the target at the k-th time, wdenotes the system
process noise, [ x(k),y(k),z(k)]Tdenotes the position of the target
at thek-th time, and t denotes the sampling time.
The observation equation relating the target state to the mea-
sured bearings is:
h(k)="α(k)
β(k)#
=arctany(k)−y 0
x(k)−x 0
arctan 
z(k)−z 0√
(x(k)−x 0)2+(y(k)−y 0)2!+η,(6)
where [ x0,y0,z0]Tdenotes the position of the observer at present,
[α(k),β(k)]Tdenotes the azimuth and elevation, and ηdenotes
the observation noise.
The FIM matrix for the target observation angle can be calcu-
lated using the following formula:
J(k)=(Φ−1)TJ(k−1)Φ−1+HT(k)R−1H(k),(7)
H(k)=∂h
∂uˆu(k|k−1)
=−sinα
rxycosα
rxy00 1×6
−cosαsinβ
r−sinαsinβ
rcosβ
r01×6
ˆu(k|k−1),(8)
where ˆu(k|k− 1) represents the predicted state at the k-th time,
andrandrxydenote the distance of the predicted position of the
target relative to the observation platform and its projection onto
the horizontal plane.
Using Eq. (7), we can obtain the FIM of the observer’s obser-
vation of the target at the next time step. As shown in Eq. (2),
to reduce the observation error, we need to increase the observa-
tion FIM. According to the D-optimization criterion, the most
common form of FIM quantifier is the determinant form:
fdopt=det(J).(9)
4
3.2. Spectrally-Weighted FIM Objective Function
The conventional D-optimality criterion maximizes the deter-
minant of the FIM, which geometrically corresponds to minimiz-
ing the volume of the uncertainty ellipsoid. In online trajectory
optimization, however, the direct use of the determinant presents
practical difficulties when the FIM approaches rank deficiency—
a situation that arises whenever multiple sight lines become
collinear or nearly collinear. This motivates the adoption of a
spectrally-weighted formulation that preserves the fundamental
optimality structure while introducing favorable gradient dynam-
ics near such degenerate configurations.
The spectrally-weighted objective function is formulated as
the logarithmic aggregation of FIM eigenvalues:
fspec(u)=nX
i=1ln λi(J(u)),(10)
whereλi(J(u)) denotes the i-th eigenvalue of the FIMJparame-
terized by the platform motion parameters u. Recalling that the
determinant of a matrix equals the product of its eigenvalues,
this objective function can be rewritten compactly as:
fspec(u)=ln det(J(u))=ln fdopt(u),(11)
Because the natural logarithm is a strictly monotone increas-
ing function on (0 ,+∞), the ordering of objective function values
is preserved under this transformation. Consequently, any pa-
rameter vector uthat maximizes fdoptalso maximizes fspec, and
vice versa. The two objective functions therefore share identical
local and global maxima, as well as identical stationary-point
structure. The spectrally-weighted formulation does not alter the
fundamental optimality properties of the FIM-based trajectory
planning problem; rather, its practical advantages stem from the
gradient dynamics induced by the logarithmic transformation,
which we examine next.
In bearing-only localization, adegenerate (or singular)
configurationoccurs whenever multiple sight lines become
collinear or nearly collinear. Under such configurations, the
FIM loses full rank, its determinant tends to zero, and the cor-
responding Cramér-Rao lower bound diverges, rendering the
target state practically unobservable. Both D-optimality and
the spectrally-weighted objective function are maximized at the
same non-degenerate geometry. The critical difference lies in
how their gradients behave when the platform trajectory ap-
proaches such degenerate situation.
To see this, differentiate Eq. (11) with respect to the motion
parameters using the chain rule:
∇fspec(u)=1
det(J(u))∇fdopt(u).(12)
Taking norms on both sides yields the gradient magnitude
ratio as the following:
∥∇f spec(u)∥
∥∇f dopt(u)∥=1
det(J(u)).(13)
Equation (13) reveals a fundamental behavioral difference.
Near a degenerate configuration, det(J)→0+, so the right-handside diverges to+ ∞. In other words, the spectrally-weighted
objective function generates a gradient whose magnitude scales
inversely with the determinant of the FIM. As the observation
geometry approaches singularity, this gradient grows without
bound, producing a strongrepulsive forcethat pushes the op-
timization away from the degenerate locus. By contrast, the
D-optimality gradient ∇fdoptremains bounded (in fact, it tends
linearly to zero as the configuration approaches degeneracy),
offering no comparable escape mechanism.
To make this concrete, consider the FIM of a dual-UA V sys-
tem as a function of the intersection angle θbetween two sight
lines. When the UA Vs are positioned such that θ→ 0 (collinear
sight lines), the FIM determinant behaves asymptotically as
det(J)∼Cθ2for some positive constant Cdetermined by the
range and measurement noise variance. Substituting this into
Eq. (13) gives:
∥∇f spec∥
∥∇f dopt∥∼1
Cθ2→+∞asθ→0.(14)
The spectrally-weighted gradient therefore diverges as 1 /θ2
near collinearity, whereas the D-optimality gradient vanishes as
θ. This disparity is not a matter of numerical conditioning; it is
an intrinsic property of the logarithmic transformation.
The degeneracy-avoidance property translates directly into
three operational benefits for online UA V trajectory planning.
(1) Automatic observability safeguarding.During trajectory
optimization, if a candidate motion direction would cause the
UA V’s sight line to align with a previously recorded bearing, the
FIM approaches rank deficiency and det(J) shrinks. Under D-
optimality, the resulting gradient would be too weak to steer the
optimizer away from this hazardous direction. The spectrally-
weighted objective function, by virtue of Eq. (13), generates
an increasingly strong counter-gradient that repels the planned
trajectory from collinear geometries. This objective function
acts as an implicit observability safeguard without requiring
explicit enforcement of minimum bearing-separation angles or
hard constraints on angular diversity.
(2) Robust initialization.In practice, the UA V may begin
its mission with a suboptimal initial trajectory—for example,
a straight-line approach that keeps the target bearing nearly
constant. Such initial segments are close to degenerate, so the
D-optimality objective function contributes negligible gradient
information, effectively freezing the optimization in its early
iterations. Because the spectrally-weighted gradient scales in-
versely with det(J), it maintains substantial magnitude precisely
in these near-degenerate regions, allowing the planner to correct
poor initial geometries rapidly rather than waiting for the UA V
to drift into a more favorable configuration by chance.
(3) Stabilized multi-objective function interactions.When
the FIM term is combined with multi-UA V coordination objec-
tive functions (addressed in Sections 3.3 and 3.4), the dynamic
range of the D-optimality objective function becomes a practical
concern. Near-degenerate flight segments can drive det(J) down
to 10−6or lower, whereas favorable geometries may yield values
of 104or higher. Spanning ten orders of magnitude within a
single sub-objective function destabilizes the relative weighting
5
among competing terms. The logarithmic transformation com-
presses this range into a moderate interval (roughly −14 to+9 in
natural-log units), ensuring that the FIM term contributes stable
gradient information across the entire planning horizon without
swamping or being swamped by other sub-objective functions.
It is worth emphasizing that the advantages described above
do not arise from any difference in the global optima of the
two formulations. As established by Eq. (11), the spectrally-
weighted and D-optimality objective functions share the same
optimal geometry. The benefits are insteaddynamicalin na-
ture: the logarithmic transformation reshapes the optimization
landscape near degenerate boundaries, providing stronger repul-
sive forces and more stable multi-objective function interactions
during the finite-iteration trajectory optimization process.
3.3. Intersection Angle Objective Function Extended for Dual-
UAV Configuration
When multiple observation platforms are deployed, the ge-
ometric configuration between the UA Vs fundamentally deter-
mines the triangulation accuracy. For a dual-UA V bearing-only
system, the critical geometric parameter is theintersection an-
gleθbetween the two sight lines at the target location. Intuitively,
when the two UA Vs view the target from orthogonal directions,
the bearing measurements provide complementary information
along independent axes, yielding the most reliable position es-
timate. Conversely, when the sight lines are nearly parallel
(θ→ 0), the two measurements become redundant, the triangu-
lation geometry collapses, and the target position uncertainty
grows without bound. This angular dependence is therefore
central to the design of a multi-UA V objective function.
Figure 2: Definition of intersection angle in dual-UA V scenario.
Consider two observation platforms at positions s1,s2∈R3
measuring bearing vectors to a target at p∈R3. Let a=s2−p
andb=s1−pdenote the relative position vectors from the target
to UA V 2 and UA V 1, respectively. Under equal measurement
noise variance σ2for both azimuth and elevation angles, the
bearing measurement model yields a Fisher information contri-
bution from each platform that takes the form of a projection
matrix orthogonal to the corresponding sight line.Specifically, the FIM contribution from a single platform with
sight line vis proportional toP⊥
v=I3−vv⊤/∥v∥2, which projects
onto the plane perpendicular to the line of sight. The total FIM
for target position estimation is the sum of contributions from
both UA Vs as the following:
Jpos=1
σ2
P⊥
a+P⊥
b
.(15)
This additive structure reveals that the total information de-
pends on the relative orientation of the two sight lines. When
the sight lines are orthogonal, the two projection matrices span
complementary subspaces, and the FIM accumulates maximal
directional diversity. When the sight lines are parallel, the pro-
jection matrices coincide, and the total information degenerates
to that of a single observation.
To quantify this angular dependence, assume for simplicity
that both UA Vs are at the same distance dfrom the target, so
∥a∥=∥b∥=d. Select a coordinate frame in which the two
sight lines are symmetrically disposed about the z-axis with
intersection angleθ:
a=0
dsin(θ/2)
dcos(θ/2),b=0
−dsin(θ/2)
dcos(θ/2).(16)
Substituting these into the FIM expression and carrying out
the matrix algebra, the position FIM becomes diagonal:
Jpos=1
σ22 0 0
0 1+cosθ0
0 0 2 sin2(θ/2)
=1
σ22 0 0
0 1+cosθ0
0 0 1−cosθ.(17)
From this diagonal form, the determinant evaluates directly
as the product of the diagonal entries:
det(J pos)=4(1+cosθ)(1−cosθ)
σ6=4 sin2θ
σ6d4.(18)
Since sin2θ≤1 with equality if and only if θ=90◦, the FIM
determinant is maximized precisely when the two sight lines are
orthogonal. The maximum value is 4 /(σ6d4), achieved at the
ideal triangulation geometry.
The preceding derivation establishes that maximizing the FIM
determinant is equivalent to maximizing sin2θ. It remains to
connect this to a more familiar metric in the navigation and sur-
veying literature: the Geometric Dilution of Precision (GDOP).
The GDOP for position estimation is defined as the square
root of the trace of the inverse FIM:
GDOP=q
tr(J−1pos).(19)
For the diagonal FIM structure above, the inverse is immediate
as the following:
J−1
pos=σ21/2 0 0
0 1/(1+cosθ) 0
0 0 1/(1−cosθ),(20)
6
from which
GDOP2=σ2 1
2+1
1+cosθ+1
1−cosθ!
=σ2 1
2+2
sin2θ!
.
(21)
This expression makes the geometric dependence explicit. As
θ→ 0,sinθ→ 0 and GDOP→ +∞, reflecting the collapse of
triangulation accuracy under collinear sight lines. Conversely,
atθ=90◦,sinθ=1 and the GDOP attains its minimum value
σ√5/2. Because GDOP2is a monotone decreasing function of
sin2θon (0,π), maximizing sinθ is fully equivalent to minimiz-
ing the GDOP, and both are equivalent to maximizing the FIM
determinant. These equivalences justify the use of the intersec-
tion angle sine as the multi-UA V coordination objective function.
So we define the objective function as the following:
fsin=sinθ=∥a×b∥
∥a∥·∥b∥,(22)
where aand bare the sight-line vectors from the target to the
two UA Vs. The cross-product formulation is coordinate-free and
directly computable from the instantaneous relative positions
of the platforms and the target, without requiring any angular
decomposition into azimuth or elevation components.
In the trajectory optimization framework, maximizing fsin
drives the two UA Vs toward an orthogonal viewing geometry.
This prevents the multi-platform system from collapsing into a
degenerate configuration where both observers occupy the same
bearing direction—a failure mode that is particularly dangerous
during long-duration tracking of high-maneuverability targets,
where uncoordinated trajectories can converge onto similar flight
paths. By incorporating fsinas an explicit objective function, the
planner ensures that the dual-UA V formation maintains favorable
triangulation geometry.
In summary, under symmetric equal-distance assumptions,
maximizing the intersection angle sine fsin=sinθ is equiva-
lent to maximizing the FIM determinant and minimizing the
position GDOP. This trifold equivalence provides both a theoret-
ical foundation and a practical metric for real-time multi-UA V
coordination in bearing-only target localization.
3.4. Motion-Constrained PSO with Particle Normalization
The objective functions established in Sections 3.2 and 3.3
are highly non-convex with numerous local optima, and their an-
alytical derivatives are intractable due to the geometric coupling
between UA V motion and bearing measurements. Evolution-
ary algorithms are therefore natural candidates for this problem.
Among them, Particle Swarm Optimization (PSO) is particularly
well suited because its population-based search explores multi-
ple candidate trajectories simultaneously, and its gradient-free
nature avoids the need for explicit derivative computation.
However, applying conventional PSO directly to UA V trajec-
tory planning encounters two practical obstacles. First, since
the traditional methods treat the azimuth and pitch of UA Vs
as the optimization vectors, randomly generated particles may
violate platform maneuverability limits, producing physically
infeasible trajectories. Second, the weighted-sum aggregation
of sub-objective functions requires tedious manual tuning ofcoefficients when dealing with multiple sub-objective functions,
and suffers from scale disparity among terms: the FIM term
can range from 10−6in near-degenerate geometries to 104in
favorable ones, while the intersection sine is bounded in [0 ,1].
Without normalization, the large terms dominate the gradient
and the swarm effectively optimizes only these terms, ignoring
the others. The consensus is that manual weighting can solve
this problem, but inefficiently.
We address both issues through a two-stage enhancement
built upon standard PSO. The complete optimization procedure
is presented in Algorithm 1 (The same to PSO algorithm, c1
andc2denotes learning factor, r1andr2denotes stochastic fac-
tor,pgbestdenots the best particle value discovered by the entire
population, pbest
idenotes the best value that the i-th particle has
reached since the beginning of the search). The algorithm op-
erates in a receding-horizon manner: at each planning instant,
it receives the current UA V state ( p0,v0),where p0presents to
the position of the UA V at the last time and v0presents to the
velocity of the UA V at the last time, the current target state
estimate ˆu(k), and the desired planning horizon. It then gener-
ates a population of candidate next-waypoints, evaluates them
using the spectrally-weighted FIM objective function and the
intersection-angle objective function, and returns the waypoint
with the highest information utility. The two key enhancements,
motion-constrained initialization and projection and particle nor-
malization, are embedded in the particle generation and fitness
evaluation steps.
Algorithm 1Motion-Constrained PSO with Praticle Normaliza-
tion
Require: Current UA V state s1=(p0,v0); target estimate ˆu(k);
other-UA V state s2; interval t; swarm size n; iterations k;
acceleration range of UA VsΩ a; velocity range of particles
Ωv.
Ensure:Optimal waypointp∗.
1://Step 1: Motion-constrained initialization
2:fori=1tondo
3:a i∼U(Ω a);pi←p0+tv 0+1
2t2ai
4:v i∼U(Ω v);pbest
i←pi
5:end for
6://Step 2: First-generation normalization factors
7:Evaluate fspec,fsinat all pi;M(m)←max i|f(m)
i|form=
spec,sin
8://Step 3: Iterative evolution
9:forj=1tokdo
10:fori=1tondo
11:F i←P
mwmf(m)
i
M(m); updatepbest
iandpgbest
12:v i←wv i+c1r1(pbest
i−pi)+c 2r2(pgbest−pi)
13:p′
i←pi+vi;a′←2
t2(p′
i−p0−tv 0)
14:ifa′<Ω athen
15:a′←a maxa′
∥a′∥;p′
i←p0+tv 0+1
2t2a′
16:end if
17:pi←p′
i; re-evaluatef spec,fsinatpi
18:end for
19:end for
20:returnp∗←pgbest
7
3.4.1. Motion-Constrained Initialization and Projection
The first enhancement concerns physical feasibility. In algo-
rithmic applications, the motion angles of UA Vs are typically
treated as the search space. While this approach has the advan-
tage of reducing the dimensionality of the search space, it fails
to account for the dynamic performance. For UA Vs with iner-
tial and actuator limits, waypoints optimized using traditional
methods may require instantaneous turns or accelerations that
exceed the capabilities, causing the inner-loop controller to fail
to track the planned trajectory. Alternatively, such methods may
fail to fully utilize the maneuverability of UA Vs, resulting in
overly tightly spaced waypoints. Algorithm 1 addresses this by
encoding the kinematic model directly into the initialization as
the following (Step 1, line 3):
pi=p0+tv 0+1
2t2ai,(23)
where the maneuver load aiis sampled from the admissible inter-
valΩarather than the position space itself. This guarantees by
construction that every particle represents a waypoint reachable
within one sampling interval under the actual motion capabilities
of the platform.
Figure 3: Feasible motion domains: (a) spherical domain assuming omnidi-
rectional agility; (b) ellipsoidal domain considering velocity and acceleration
constraints.
Geometrically, the set of all such positions forms an ellip-
soidal feasible domain (as illustrated in Fig. 3), whose principal
axes are determined by the velocity vector and the acceleration
bounds. The spherical feasible region assumed in conventional
PSO (which implicitly presumes omnidirectional agility) is re-
placed by this physically grounded ellipsoid.
The same motion model is enforced again during swarm evo-
lution (Step 3, lines 9–12). When a particle’s velocity update
proposes a new position p′
i, the algorithm computes the acceler-
ation required to reach it from the current state in time t:
a′=2
t2(p′
i−p0−tv 0).(24)
Ifa′exceeds the platform limit Ωa, the acceleration vector is
clipped to the maximum magnitude ( amax) and the position is
projected back onto the ellipsoidal boundary. This projectionstep ensures that every iterate (not merely the initialization) re-
mains dynamically feasible. The swarm therefore explores only
the physically attainable subset of the search space, preventing
the optimizer from wasting evaluations on unreachable way-
points and ensuring that the returned trajectory can be executed
by the autopilot without replanning or saturation.
3.4.2. Particle Normalization for Adaptive Weighting
The second enhancement addresses the multi-objective func-
tion aggregation problem. Trajectory planning must balance
information acquisition (via fspec) and, in dual-UA V scenarios,
triangulation geometry (via fsin). A conventional weighted sum
function is defined as the following:
ftotal(u)=X
mwmfm(u),m=spec,sin.(25)
where wmrepresents the weight coefficient, and satisfiesP
mwm=1.
This function suffers from two defects. First, as noted above,
the magnitudes of different sub-objective functions may differ
by orders of magnitude. Without normalization, the largest term
dominates the gradient and the swarm effectively optimizes only
that term, ignoring the others. Second, fixing constant weights
across the entire mission is suboptimal because the relative im-
portance of information versus geometric coordination evolves
as the target maneuvers and the UA V-target geometry changes.
Algorithm 1 resolves both issues through particle normaliza-
tion (Step 2 and Step 3, line 6). During the first generation, the
algorithm records the maximum absolute value observed for
each sub-objective function across the entire swarm:
M(m)=max
i∈[1,N]|fm(pi)|,m=spec,sin.(26)
These maxima serve as per-generation normalization denom-
inators. The fitness of the i-th particle in generation kis then
computed as the following:
Fi=X
mwmfm(pi)
M(m).(27)
By construction, every normalized sub-objective function
value lies in [0, 1] (or a similar range, due to the uncertainty in
the distribution of particle states), so no single term can over-
whelm the others regardless of its raw scale. The swarm there-
fore receives balanced gradient contributions from both objective
functions, preventing the trajectory planner from sacrificing tri-
angulation geometry for raw information gain, or vice versa.
It is worth noting that we have retained the weight wm, which
facilitates more intuitive manual allocation rather than requiring
multiple rounds of debugging, as is the case with traditional
methods. Furthermore, we can even build upon this foundation
to add more sub-objective functions while still ensuring that the
optimization treats all cases equally.
Moreover, because the normalization denominators are com-
puted from the first-generation population, they adapt to the
current operating region. In a long-range observation phase
where all particles exhibit small FIM values, the normalized
8
Table 1: Simulation parameters for single UA V observer scenario
Entity Initial Position (m) Initial Velocity (m/s) Acceleration (m/s2) Trajectory Order
Target [0,100,400] [−8,0,0] [1,1,0.5] 2
UA V [−1000,100,900] [10,0,0] [1,2,0] 2
FIM term retains comparable influence to the intersection term.
Conversely, during close-proximity tracking where FIM values
are large, the same normalization prevents the FIM term from
drowning out the geometric coordination objective function.
This adaptive balancing is particularly important in dual-UA V
scenarios, where the intersection-angle term must remain ac-
tive to prevent the two platforms from converging onto similar
bearing directions even as the individual FIM terms grow large.
3.4.3. Integration with Trajectory Planning
In the online execution loop, Algorithm 1 is invoked at each
planning instant with updated state estimates. The returned
waypoint p∗serves as the reference for the UA V’s low-level
controller for the next sampling interval t. At the subsequent
planning cycle, the UA V’s measured position and velocity re-
place ( p0,v0), the target estimator provides an updated ˆu, and
the optimizer runs again. This receding-horizon structure allows
the swarm to react to target maneuvers in real time: if the tar-
get changes heading abruptly, the intersection-angle and FIM
objective functions shift accordingly, and the swarm naturally
migrates toward the new optimal geometry.
In summary, Algorithm 1 combines motion-constrained initial-
ization and projection with particle normalization, addressing the
two principal limitations of conventional PSO in UA V trajectory
planning. The motion constraints ensure that every evaluated
waypoint is dynamically feasible, while the particle normaliza-
tion guarantees balanced optimization across information and
geometric objective functions without manual adjustments.
4. Simulation
To validate the effectiveness of the proposed method, MAT-
LAB was employed as the simulation platform to model a sce-
nario involving multiple observation UA Vs tracking a flying
target. The trajectory planning for the UA Vs was conducted us-
ing both the conventional FIM-based trajectory planning method
and our proposed method. Sections 4.1 and 4.2 present detailed
analyses of the positioning accuracy and axial error distribution
for single-UA V and dual-UA V target localization, respectively.
4.1. Single-UAV Scenario
The initial position of the target is set to (0 ,100,400) m with
initial velocity (−8,0,0) m/s and acceleration (1 ,1,0.5) m/s2,
executing parabolic motion. To demonstrate the superiority
of trajectory planning methods, the initial position of UA V is
set to (−1000,100,900) m with initial velocity (10 ,0,0) m/s
and acceleration (1 ,2,0) m/s2, also executing parabolic motion
with the same Trajectory Order as the target. The setup of the
simulation environment is shown in Tab. 1.To simulate observation errors, camera payload pixel extrac-
tion error is set to 2 pixels, camera attitude systematic error to
0.1◦, camera attitude random error to 0 .05◦, and camera self-
localization random error to 0.1 m.
This section simulates single-UA V observation of moving
targets, utilizing bearing-only measurements as the sole infor-
mation source for target position estimation. The observation
frequency of UA V was set to 10 Hz. During the initial 8 seconds,
the UA V follows the predetermined trajectory. Subsequently,
trajectory planning is performed every 2 seconds, with the UA V
executing planned trajectories while continuously estimating the
target position in real-time [38].
The experimental methods are designated as follows for
the ablation study:D+PSOdenotes the conventional D-
optimality FIM with standard PSO (baseline);S+PSOdenotes
the spectrally-weighted FIM with standard PSO, testing the ef-
fect of the spectral weighting objective function in isolation;
D+IPSOdenotes the conventional D-optimality FIM with the
improved PSO (motion constraints and normalization), testing
the effect of the enhanced optimizer in isolation;S+IPSOde-
notes the spectrally-weighted FIM with the improved PSO, repre-
senting the full proposed method that integrates all contributions.
4.1.1. Experimental Setup and Feasibility Verification
Fig. 4 presents observer and target trajectories, and fig. 5
presents a comparison between the estimated target positions and
the actual trajectory for 5 cases:Raw(No Planning),D+PSO,
S+PSO,D+IPSO, andS+IPSO(proposed method).
Figure 4: Trajectories of target and single UA V observer.
Evidently, when directly employing the original parabolic tra-
jectory for triangulation-based measurement (No Planning), the
estimation erroneously converges to the UA V’s own trajectory.
This phenomenon may be attributed to the initialization of the
9
Figure 5: Convergence comparison of target localization.
UA V’s motion parameters as prior values during target position
estimation, causing the solution to rapidly converge to the UA V
trajectory with minimal iterations based on the observation data.
Through trajectory planning, the UA V can promptly escape from
this erroneous convergence state and rapidly converge to the true
target trajectory, regardless of whether the conventional FIM
method or our proposed method is employed. The measure-
ment results during the initial estimation in Fig. 5 approximate
the UA V trajectory because the target motion parameter esti-
mates obtained during the unplanned initial phase were used as
initialization values. As the estimation process continues, the
estimated position gradually converges toward the truth.
4.1.2. Ablation Study and Accuracy Analysis
To validate the accuracy of each component and eliminate
the influence of stochastic factors, 100 Monte Carlo simulation
trials were conducted. In each trial, the line-of-sight vector errors
arising from pixel errors and self-localization errors followed
a normal distribution. The measurement results at a specific
convergence moment were recorded and statistically analyzed
against the ground truth.
Fig. 6 represents the statistical distribution of target position
measurement errors using boxplots across the four methods.
The results demonstrate that the adoption of planned trajectories
renders the originally inestimable target position information
measurable. The proposed method (S+IPSO) exhibits the most
concentrated error distribution with the lowest median and the
tightest interquartile range.
Table 2: Statistical comparison of localization errors for single-UA V scenario
(meters)
Method Median Mean Std Dev Outliers Max Min
Raw – 815.65 32.68 – – –
D+PSO 587.97 548.53 218.96 0 820.39 166.36
S+PSO 587.82 548.49 218.44 0 820.91 148.33
D+IPSO 4.94 8.38 8.03 5 39.58 0.06
S+IPSO 4.63 6.77 6.78 5 38.10 0.08
The ablation study results in Table 2 reveal distinct roles of
200300400500600700800Values
D+PSO S+PSO D+IPSO S+IPSO
Data Set0510152025303540
ValuesFigure 6: Boxplots of localization errors for the four compared methods (single-
UA V scenario).
the proposed components. ComparingS+PSOagainstD+PSO,
the replacement of D-optimality with the spectrally-weighted
objective function while retaining the standard PSO yields negli-
gible improvement (0.03% reduction in median error, 0.01% in
mean error). This indicates that the spectrally-weighted formu-
lation alone, without the motion-constrained optimizer, cannot
overcome the limitations of conventional PSO in navigating the
highly non-convex planning landscape.
ComparingD+IPSOagainstD+PSO, the introduction of
the improved PSO (motion-model-constrained initialization and
adaptive normalization) while retaining the conventional D-
optimality criterion produces a dramatic accuracy improvement:
the median error is reduced by99.16%and the mean error by
98.47%. This confirms that the motion-constrained PSO is
the dominant contributor to performance gain, as its physically
grounded initialization prevents infeasible waypoints and the
adaptive normalization stabilizes the optimization process.
Finally, comparingS+IPSO(proposed method) against
D+PSO, the integration of both the spectrally-weighted ob-
jective function and the improved PSO achieves the best overall
performance, with a99.21%reduction in median error and
a98.77%reduction in mean error. Relative to D+IPSO,
S+IPSO achieves an additional6.28%median reduction
and19.21%mean reduction, demonstrating that the spectrally-
weighted objective function provides further refinement when
coupled with the improved optimizer. The spectral weighting
reshapes the local optimization landscape near degenerate ge-
ometries, allowing the swarm to more efficiently exploit favor-
able configurations once the motion constraints have brought
particles into physically attainable regions.
4.1.3. Axial Error Distribution Analysis
To examine how localization errors are distributed across the
three spatial dimensions, the target position estimation errors
along the x,y, and zaxes were extracted from the simulation
results. Fig. 7 illustrates the localization errors along the x,y,
andzaxes during UA V target tracking. The results indicate that,
under comparable total localization errors, the proposed method
10
0 10 20 30 40 50 60 70 80 90 100
time-1000-5000errX(m)Raw D+PSO S+PSO
D+IPSO S+IPSO
0 10 20 30 40 50 60 70 80 90 100
time-1000100200errY(m)
0 10 20 30 40 50 60 70 80 90 100
time0200400errZ(m)Figure 7: Localization error decomposition along x, y, and z axes for single UA V observer scenario.
x y z
Dimension051015202530354045ValueD+PSO
S+PSO
D+IPSO
S+IPSO
Figure 8: Box plots of localization error components for single UA V observer
scenario.
(S+IPSO) yields more balanced error components across all
three axes compared to the conventional FIM method (D+PSO),
which exhibits strongly axis-dependent behavior.
To mitigate stochastic effects, the error components along
thex,y, and zaxes from the 100 simulation trials were statis-
tically analyzed and presented as boxplots. Fig. 8 and Table 3
demonstrate the differences in the distribution of axial errors.
The conventional FIM method (D+PSO) achieves substan-
tially different accuracy levels along different axes: the me-
dian error along the y-axis (47.91 m) is an order of magnitude
smaller than that along the x-axis (517.18 m), reflecting the
anisotropic nature of D-optimality when the observer trajectory
is predominantly aligned with one direction. In contrast, the pro-Table 3: Axial error distribution comparison for single-UA V scenario (meters)
Axis Method Median Mean Std Dev Outliers Max Min
xD+PSO 517.18 482.23 192.21 0 721.04 147.51
S+PSO 517.04 483.19 191.76 0 721.27 131.96
D+IPSO 4.62 7.63 7.19 5 35.49 0.04
S+IPSO 4.34 6.16 6.08 4 34.05 0.02
yD+PSO 47.91 48.95 23.74 0 84.29 10.91
S+PSO 48.54 48.97 23.65 0 84.58 9.64
D+IPSO 0.43 0.66 0.62 8 2.97 0.004
S+IPSO 0.39 0.54 0.53 4 2.86 0.004
zD+PSO 276.24 256.70 102.39 0 386.06 76.16
S+PSO 276.24 256.70 102.15 0 386.63 67.04
D+IPSO 1.77 3.39 3.54 6 17.26 0.02
S+IPSO 1.60 2.73 2.96 5 16.87 0.02
posed method (S+IPSO) reduces errors consistently across all
axes. Notably, the y-axis accuracy remains the highest (median
0.39 m), while the x- and z-axis errors are brought to comparable
levels (median 4.34 m and 1.60 m, respectively), indicating that
our method slightly mitigates the directional bias inherent in
conventional determinant maximization.
4.2. Dual-UAV Scenario
The target initial position is set the same as Section 4.1.
Two UA Vs’ initial positions are set to ( −1000,100,900) m and
(−1000,0,900) m, both with initial velocity (5 ,2,0) m/s, execut-
ing constant velocity motion (Trajectory Order is 1). The setup
of the simulation environment is shown in Tab. 4. Observation
error parameters are identical to Section 4.1.
To simulate observation errors, camera payload pixel extrac-
tion error is set to 2 pixels, camera attitude systematic error to
11
Table 4: Simulation parameters for dual-UA V scenario
Entity Initial Position (m) Initial Velocity (m/s) Acceleration (m/s2) Trajectory Order
Target [0,100,400] [−8,0,0] [1,1,0.5] 2
UA V 1 [−1000,100,900] [5,2,0] [0,0,0] 1
UA V 2 [−1000,0,900] [5,2,0] [0,0,0] 1
Figure 9: Trajectories of target and dual UA V observers.
0.1◦, camera attitude random error to 0 .05◦, and camera self-
localization random error to 0.1 m.
This section simulates dual-UA V observation of moving tar-
gets, utilizing bearing-only measurements from two platforms
for target position estimation. The observation frequency was
set to 10 Hz. During the initial 8 seconds, the UA Vs followed
predetermined trajectories to acquire sufficient target informa-
tion. Subsequently, trajectory planning was performed every 2
seconds, and the UA Vs were controlled to follow the optimized
trajectories while continuously estimating the position of the
target via triangulation.
The experimental methods are designated as follows for
the ablation study:D+PSOdenotes the conventional D-
optimality FIM with standard PSO (baseline);S+PSOdenotes
the spectrally-weighted FIM with standard PSO;D+IPSOde-
notes the conventional D-optimality FIM with the improved
PSO;DA+PSOdenotes the D-optimality FIM with the inter-
section angle sine and standard PSO, testing the geometric co-
ordination objective function in isolation;SA+IPSOdenotes
the spectrally-weighted FIM with the intersection angle sine and
the improved PSO, representing the full proposed method that
integrates all contributions.
4.2.1. Experimental Setup and Feasibility Verification
Fig. 10 presents a comparison between the estimated target po-
sitions and the actual trajectory for 6 cases:Raw(No Planning),
D+PSO,S+PSO,D+IPSO,DA+PSO, andSA+IPSO.
Unlike the monocular measurement scenario, the dual-UA V
configuration enables adequate target information acquisition
even when the UA V trajectory order is lower than that of the
target motion, yielding relatively reliable target position esti-
Figure 10: Convergence comparison for dual-UA V scenario.
mates. Nevertheless, trajectory planning enables the UA Vs to
achieve superior position solutions using the same triangulation
algorithm.
4.2.2. Ablation Study and Accuracy Analysis
To validate accuracy and eliminate stochastic effects, 100
Monte Carlo simulation trials were conducted. Line-of-sight vec-
tor errors followed a normal distribution in each trial. Measure-
ment results at a specific convergence moment were recorded
and statistically analyzed.
Table 5: Statistical comparison of localization errors for dual-UA V scenario
(meters)
Method Median Mean Std Dev Outliers Max Min
Raw 1.31 1.60 1.16 4 5.48 0.15
D+PSO 0.66 0.77 0.57 0 2.41 0.06
S+PSO 0.61 0.73 0.52 0 2.20 0.07
D+IPSO 0.63 0.79 0.67 7 2.96 0.03
DA+PSO 0.66 0.75 0.56 2 2.53 0.03
SA+IPSO 0.20 0.22 0.12 2 0.62 0.04
The ablation study results in Table 5 reveal important synergis-
tic interactions among the proposed components in the dual-UA V
setting. ComparingS+PSOagainstD+PSO, the spectrally-
weighted objective function with standard PSO achieves a mod-
est improvement: median error is reduced by7.58%and mean
error by5.19%. This demonstrates that the spectral weighting
provides some benefit in the dual-UA V context, likely due to its
stabilizing effect on the multi-objective function landscape, but
the improvement is limited without the enhanced optimizer.
12
RAW D+PSO S+PSO D+IPSO DA+PSO SA+IPSO
Data Set012345ValuesFigure 11: Boxplots of localization errors for the five compared methods (dual-
UA V scenario).
ComparingD+IPSOagainstD+PSO, the improved PSO
alone with conventional D-optimality yields mixed results: the
median error is reduced by4.55%, but the mean error actually
increases by2.60%, and the number of outliers rises from 0
to 7. This indicates that in multi-UA V scenarios, the motion-
constrained optimizer without proper geometric coordination
can destabilize the planning process. The particle normalization,
when applied to the FIM objective function alone, may overem-
phasize the information gain ignoring the triangulation geometry,
leading to poor geometric configurations occasionally.
ComparingDA+PSOagainstD+PSO, adding the intersec-
tion angle sine objective function to the conventional D-opt+
standard PSO yields no improvement in median error (0.00%
reduction) and only a marginal2.60%reduction in mean error.
This is a critical finding: the intersection angle objective func-
tion, when paired with the conventional PSO and D-optimality,
cannot effectively guide the swarm toward favorable triangula-
tion geometries because the standard optimizer lacks the motion
constraints to execute the required maneuvers and the normal-
ization to balance competing objective functions.
Finally, comparingSA+IPSO(the full proposed method)
againstD+PSO, the integration of all three contributions—
spectrally-weighted FIM, intersection angle sine, and improved
PSO—achieves a69.70%reduction in median error and a
71.43%reduction in mean error. Relative toS+PSO(spec-
tral weighting alone),SA+IPSOachieves an additional67.21%
median reduction, demonstrating that the intersection angle ob-
jective function and the improved optimizer are essential for
realizing the full potential of the spectral weighting. Relative
toDA+PSO(intersection angle with conventional optimizer),
SA+IPSOachieves a69.70%median reduction, confirming that
the intersection angle sine objective function requires the im-
proved PSO to effectively steer the dual-UA V formation toward
orthogonal viewing geometries.
4.2.3. Axial Error Distribution Analysis
Following the approach in Section 4.1.3, the target localiza-
tion errors along the x,y, and zaxes were extracted from the 100Table 6: Axial error distribution comparison for dual-UA V scenario (meters)
Axis Method Median Mean Std Dev Outliers Max Min
xD+PSO 0.58 0.68 0.51 0 2.11 0.01
S+PSO 0.52 0.64 0.46 0 1.91 0.02
D+IPSO 0.58 0.74 0.64 7 2.79 0.01
DA+PSO 0.59 0.66 0.49 2 2.25 0.003
SA+IPSO 0.17 0.19 0.12 1 0.59 0.01
yD+PSO 0.11 0.13 0.11 3 0.48 0.001
S+PSO 0.11 0.13 0.09 0 0.41 0.004
D+IPSO 0.04 0.05 0.04 0 0.15 0.001
DA+PSO 0.12 0.14 0.10 3 0.46 0.002
SA+IPSO 0.05 0.05 0.04 5 0.23 0.001
zD+PSO 0.30 0.33 0.25 0 1.06 0.01
S+PSO 0.26 0.31 0.23 1 1.00 0.001
D+IPSO 0.19 0.26 0.22 6 0.96 0.01
DA+PSO 0.29 0.32 0.26 3 1.11 0.001
SA+IPSO 0.08 0.09 0.05 0 0.20 0.002
simulation trials. Fig. 12 illustrates the localization errors along
three orthogonal axes for a representative trial. The results indi-
cate that target localization errors following trajectory planning
via our method are more uniformly distributed.
To mitigate stochastic effects, error components along the
x,y, and zaxes from 100 trials were statistically analyzed as
boxplots. Fig. 13 and Table 6 demonstrate the differences in
error distribution across three directions.
The results exhibit distinct characteristics across the methods.
The conventional FIM method (D+PSO) achieves higher accu-
racy along the y-axis but suffers from significant accuracy degra-
dation in the other two dimensions.S+PSO(spectral weight-
ing alone) shows modest balanced improvements.D+IPSO
(improved PSO alone) achieves the best y-axis accuracy (me-
dian 0.04 m) but produces numerous outliers in xand z(7
and 6, respectively), indicating unstable geometric coordination.
DA+PSO(intersection angle with conventional optimizer) actu-
ally degrades y-axis accuracy relative to D+PSO. In contrast,
SA+IPSO(the full proposed method) appropriately relaxes the
y-axis accuracy requirements to achieve balanced improvements
across all three dimensions, with median errors of 0.17 m ( x),
0.05 m (y), and 0.08 m (z), most lower than the baseline.
For dual-UA V observation, the proposed full method achieves
a median accuracy of 0.20 m for 1100 m range targets, repre-
senting a69.70%improvement over conventional FIM methods.
Furthermore, the proposed method exhibits more balanced axial
error characteristics: while conventional FIM methods achieve
high accuracy along the UA V motion direction but poor accuracy
in other directions, the proposed method effectively improves
localization accuracy across all directions simultaneously.
5. Discussion
This paper proposes novel trajectory planning methods based
on conventional FIM optimization. To validate feasibility and
theoretical performance improvements, simulations were de-
signed for single-UA V and dual-UA V observation scenarios of
a single moving target. Comparisons were conducted among
13
0 10 20 30 40 50 60 70 80 90 100
time-2024errX(m)Raw D+PSO S+PSO
D+IPSO DA+PSO SA+IPSO
0 10 20 30 40 50 60 70 80 90 100
time-0.500.5errY(m)
0 10 20 30 40 50 60 70 80 90 100
time-202errZ(m)Figure 12: Localization error decomposition along x , y , and z axes for dual-UA V scenario.
x y z
Dimension00.20.40.60.811.2ValueD+PSO
S+PSO
D+IPSO
DA+PSO
SA+IPSO
Figure 13: Box plots of localization error components for dual-UA V observers
scenario.
Raw(no planning), D-optimality FIM with intersection an-
gle (D+PSO), spectrally-weighted FIM with standard PSO
(S+PSO), D-optimality FIM with improved PSO (D+IPSO),
D-optimality FIM and intersection angle with standard PSO
(DA+PSO), spectrally-weighted FIM with improved PSO
(S+IPSO), and spectrally-weighted FIM and intersection an-
gle with improved PSO (SA+IPSO).
Experimental results demonstrate that for single-UA V ob-
servation, the proposed method achieves approximately 5 m
terminal prediction point median distance error after planning,
representing a99.21%reduction compared to the conventional
FIM method. For dual-UA V observation, terminal prediction
point median distance error is reduced by69.70%. The tra-jectory optimization algorithm exhibits superior performance
in bearing-only localization tasks involving long-range, high-
maneuverability targets.
The ablation study design provides valuable insight into
the individual and synergistic contributions of each proposed
component. In the single-UA V scenario, the improved PSO
emerges as the dominant factor:D+IPSO(improved PSO with
D-optimality) achieves 99.16% error reduction, whileS+PSO
(spectral weighting with standard PSO) shows virtually no im-
provement. This suggests that in single-observer settings, the
primary bottleneck is optimizer feasibility and stability rather
than the FIM criterion itself. The spectrally-weighted objec-
tive function contributes marginal additional gain (6.28% over
D+IPSO) by refining local search near degenerate boundaries.
In the dual-UA V scenario, the story is more nuanced. Here,
no single component alone achieves substantial improvement:
S+PSOprovides modest gain (7.58%),D+IPSOyields mixed
results with increased outliers, andDA+PSOshows no median
improvement at all. Only when all three components are inte-
grated (SA+IPSO) does the method realize its full potential.
This strong synergy arises because the intersection angle objec-
tive function demands precise geometric coordination that the
standard PSO cannot deliver, while the improved PSO requires
a geometric guidance term to prevent the normalization scheme
from over-emphasizing FIM at the expense of triangulation qual-
ity. The spectrally-weighted FIM stabilizes the multi-objective
function landscape, ensuring that neither term dominates.
However, one potential limitation of our method is its require-
ment for adequate prior observation information to guarantee
convergence. As described in Section 4.1.1, the UA V must first
track the target along a predetermined trajectory for a period to
acquire sufficient information. Without adequate prior observa-
14
tions, convergence requires significantly longer duration.
Second, in single-UA V observation scenarios, the target must
not undergo drastic motion changes within short time intervals,
otherwise localization accuracy may rapidly diverge. This funda-
mental limitation arises because the proposed method employs
Trajectory Intersection to obtain target motion parameters within
short time windows. If the target undergoes abrupt motion
changes, the Trajectory Order may change abruptly, leading to
convergence failure.
Future work will investigate adaptive weight adjustment mech-
anisms for the multi-objective function and extend the frame-
work to heterogeneous UA V swarms with mixed sensor modali-
ties. Additionally, the development of online initialization strate-
gies that reduce the required prior observation window would
further enhance the practical applicability of the method.
6. Conclusion
This paper presents an online trajectory optimization method
for bearing-only localization using single and dual UA V plat-
forms in dynamic environments. Beyond conventional FIM con-
siderations, the method incorporates an intersection angle sine
objective function for dual-UA V coordination and a spectrally-
weighted FIM objective function that provides stronger gradients
near degenerate configurations. The planning method improves
upon conventional Particle Swarm Optimization by incorpo-
rating platform motion model constraints to prevent trajectory
discontinuities and ensure physical feasibility. For objective
function weighting, a particle normalization adaptive scheme
is proposed based on PSO characteristics, addressing trajectory
divergence under data singularity conditions.
Simulation results demonstrate that for single-UA V scenar-
ios, target trajectories are reasonably predicted, with terminal
prediction point median distance error reduced by99.21%after
planning. For dual-UA V scenarios, terminal prediction point
median distance error is reduced by69.70%. Our method ex-
hibits superior performance in long-duration bearing-only target
localization of maneuverability targets at extended ranges.
References
[1]Jorge Pe ¨na Queralta, Niko L Taipalmaa, Barias Chakare
Pullinen, Victor Kathan Sarker, Gia Thinh Nguyen,
Tuan Nguyen Gia, Mohammed Sijad Ali, Matti Raitoharju,
Tomi Westerlund, et al. Collaborative multi-robot search
and rescue: Planning, coordination, perception, and active
vision.IEEE Access, 8:191617–191643, 2020.
[2]Wang Shule, Wang Jianhua, Li Xingxing, and Di Xi-
aoguang. Uwb- and imu-based indoor positioning fusion
algorithm for uav.Procedia Computer Science, 175:357–
364, 2020.
[3]Freddy Demaine, Sanaa Sharafeddine, and Omar Farhat.
An optimized uav trajectory planning for localization in
disaster scenarios.Computer Networks, 179:107378, 2020.[4]Zhaoyu Zhang, Nan Li, Gongmin Yan, and Weiqi Li. The
development of distributed cooperative localization algo-
rithms for multi-uav systems in the past decade.Measure-
ment, 256, 2025.
[5]Václav Pritzl, Matouš Vrba, Petr Št ˘epán, and Martin Saska.
Cooperative navigation and guidance of a micro-scale
aerial vehicle by an accompanying uav using 3d lidar
relative localization. In2022 International Conference
on Unmanned Aircraft Systems (ICUAS), pages 526–535,
2022.
[6]Zhenjing Guo, Feng Zhao, Yin Sun, Xin Chen, and Ruiying
Wu. Research on target localization in airborne electro-
optical stabilized platforms based on adaptive extended
kalman filtering.Measurement, 234:114794, 2024.
[7]Luka Kramari, Niko Jelui, Tomislav Radii, and Mario Mu-
tra. A comprehensive survey on short-distance localization
of uavs.Drones, 9(3), 2025.
[8]Lang He, Pan Gong, Xiaofei Zhang, and Zheng Wang.
The bearing-only target localization via the single uav:
Asymptotically unbiased closed-form solution and path
planning.IEEE Access, 7:153592–153604, 2019.
[9]Steven C Nardone and Vincent J Aidala. Observability
criteria for bearings-only target motion analysis.IEEE
Transactions on Aerospace and Electronic Systems, AES-
17(2):162–166, 1981.
[10] V . Aidala and S. Hammel. Utilization of modified polar
coordinates for bearings-only tracking.IEEE Transactions
on Automatic Control, 28(3):283–294, 1983.
[11] Sheng Xu. Optimal sensor placement for target localiza-
tion using hybrid rss, aoa and toa measurements.IEEE
Communications Letters, 24(9):1966 – 1970, 2020.
[12] Sheng Xu, Yongsheng Ou, and Xinyu Wu. Optimal sen-
sor placement for 3-d time-of-arrival target localization.
IEEE Transactions on Signal Processing, 67(19):5018–
5031, 2019.
[13] Kutluyil Dogancay. Optimal geometries for AOA localiza-
tion in the Bayesian sense.Sensors, 22(24):9802, 2022.
[14] Augusto Aubry, Prabhu Babu, Paolo Braca, Antonio
De Maio, and Kuntal Panwar. Sensor placement strate-
gies for target localization via 3-d aoa measurements.
IEEE Transactions on Aerospace and Electronic Systems,
61(2):2134 – 2148, 2025.
[15] Jianan Li, Zian Ning, Shaoming He, Chang-Hun Lee, and
Shiyu Zhao. Three-dimensional bearing-only target fol-
lowing via observability-enhanced helical guidance.IEEE
Transactions on Robotics, 39(2):1509–1526, 2023.
[16] Jicheng Peng, Qianshuai Wang, Bingyu Jin, Yong Zhang,
and Kelin Lu. Trajectory optimization to enhance observ-
ability for bearing-only target localization and sensor bias
calibration.Biomimetics, 9(9):510, 2024.
15
[17] Yingbo Fu, Ziwen Yang, Liang Xu, Yi Guo, Shanying Zhu,
and Xinping Guan. Trajectory optimization of multiple
uavs for bearing-only measurements.Ocean Engineering,
343:123308, 2026.
[18] Peng Sun, Shiji Tong, Kaiyu Qin, Zhenbing Luo, Boxian
Lin, and Mengji Shi. Low-cost real-time remote sensing
and geolocation of moving targets via monocular bearing-
only micro uavs.Remote Sensing, 17(23), 2025.
[19] Nikolay Atanasov, Jerome Le Ny, Kostas Daniilidis, and
George J. Pappas. Information acquisition with sensing
robots: Algorithms and error bounds. InIEEE Interna-
tional Conference on Robotics and Automation, pages 6447
– 6454, 2014.
[20] Ruzena Bajcsy, Yiannis Aloimonos, and John K Tsot-
sos. Revisiting active perception.Autonomous Robots,
42(2):177–196, 2018.
[21] Benjamin Charrow, Vijay Kumar, and Nathan Michael.
Information-theoretic mapping using cauchy-schwarz
quadratic mutual information. In2015 IEEE International
Conference on Robotics and Automation (ICRA), pages
4971–4978, 2015.
[22] Geoffrey A. Hollinger and Gaurav S. Sukhatme. Sampling-
based robotic information gathering algorithms.Interna-
tional Journal of Robotics Research, 33(9):1271 – 1287,
2014.
[23] Sanjiban Choudhury, Ashish Kapoor, Gireeja Ranade, Se-
bastian Scherer, and Debadeepta Dey. Adaptive informa-
tion gathering via imitation learning. InRobotics: Science
and Systems, volume 13, 2017.
[24] Marija Popovi ´c, Gregory Hitz, Juan Nieto, Inkyu Sa,
Roland Siegwart, and Enric Galceran. Online informa-
tive path planning for active classification using uavs. In
IEEE International Conference on Robotics and Automa-
tion (ICRA), pages 5753–5758, 2017.
[25] Julius Rückin, Liren Jin, and Marija Popovi ´c. Adaptive
informative path planning using deep reinforcement learn-
ing for UA V-based active sensing. InIEEE International
Conference on Robotics and Automation (ICRA), pages
4473–4479, 2022.
[26] Alfonso Sciacchitano, Liraz Mudrik, Sean Kragelund, and
Isaac Kaminer. Multi-UA V trajectory optimization for
bearing-only localization in GPS denied environments.
arXiv preprint arXiv:2602.11116, 2026.
[27] Liraz Mudrik, Alfonso Sciacchitano, Sean Kragelund,
Justin Kang, and Isaac Kaminer. Optimization of observer
trajectory for coordinated bearing-only localization in con-
strained three-dimensional scenarios. InAIAA Science and
Technology Forum and Exposition, AIAA SciTech Forum
2025, 2025.[28] Mohammadreza Doostmohammadian, Amin Taghieh, and
Houman Zarrabi. Distributed estimation approach for track-
ing a mobile target via formation of UA Vs.IEEE Transac-
tions on Automation Science and Engineering, 19(4):3765–
3776, 2022.
[29] Xuesheng Qin, Kebo Li, Yangang Liang, and Yuanhe Liu.
Minimum-effort waypoint-following differential geometric
guidance law design for endo-atmospheric flight vehicles.
Drones, 7:369, 2023.
[30] Xingyi Pan, Xingyu He, Xiaoyue Ren, and Duo Qi. Spher-
ical coordinate system-based fusion path planning algo-
rithm for uavs in complex emergency rescue and civil
environments.Drones, 10(4):285, 2026.
[31] Rui Jiang, Ru Li, Zixuan Guo, Jianping Li, Kai Su, Zhe
Cao, and Jian Li. Self-supervised learning of lidar 3d point
clouds via motion estimation and fusion.arXiv preprint
arXiv:2504.04289, 2026.
[32] Jianan Wang, Lujun Wang, Zhuoran Wang, Liang Xie, and
Huang Hu. Particle filter-guided online neural networks for
multi-target bearing-only tracking in passive sonar systems.
Sensors, 25(18), 2025.
[33] Gregory Hitz, Enric Galceran, Marie-Eve Garneau,
Francois Pomerleau, and Roland Siegwart. Adaptive
continuous-space informative path planning for online
environmental monitoring.Journal of Field Robotics,
34(8):1427–1449, 2017.
[34] Apoorva Vashisth, Julius Ruckin, Federico Magistri, Cyrill
Stachniss, and Marija Popovic. Deep reinforcement learn-
ing with dynamic graphs for adaptive informative path plan-
ning.IEEE Robotics and Automation Letters, 9(9):7747 –
7754, 2024.
[35] Zican Zhou, Jiangping Hu, Xuesong Wu, Shangzhi Liao,
and Jiao Yuan. Fixed-time target tracking and encirclement
control for multi-UA Vs with bearing-only measurements.
Drones, 10(1):63, 2026.
[36] Jinhui Dai, Wenqiang Pu, Junkun Yan, Qingjiang Shi, and
Hongwei Liu. Multi-uav collaborative trajectory optimiza-
tion for asynchronous 3-d passive multitarget tracking.
IEEE Transactions on Geoscience and Remote Sensing,
61:1–16, 2023.
[37] Hanyu Wang and Xingqun Zhan. Energy-efficient multi-
uav cooperative localization by measurement scheduling.
InProceedings of the 38th International Technical Meeting
of the Satellite Division of The Institute of Navigation (ION
GNSS+2025), pages 427–436, 2025.
[38] Huayu Huang, Banglei Guan, Yang Shang, and Qifeng Yu.
3d trajectory reconstruction of moving points based on a
monocular camera.Measurement, 256, 2025.
16